Toward Integrating Adaptive Experience Replay and Online Uncertainty
Estimation in Safe Actor-Critic Optimal Control
Mahshad Rastegarmoghaddama,∗, Davoud Nikkhouya, Shima Samadzadeha
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
Abstract
Safe actor–critic control often treats barrier filtering, uncertainty estimation, and experience replay as separate
modules, even though each changes the data used for learning and control. We develop an integrated architecture
in which the uncertainty estimate updates the obstacle geometry used by a control barrier function, filter inter-
ventions and estimation residuals determine replay priority, and the critic learns from the executed rather than
nominal action. We instantiate the architecture on a two-dimensional robot-navigation task with corrupted obsta-
cle measurements and compare six component-matched configurations under common training budgets, random
seeds, sensor streams, exploration, and disturbances. Evaluation includes a moderate post-training test, an eleven-
level perception-noise sweep, and an exploratory extreme-stress test at multiplier 6.0. In the extreme test, the
integrated configuration recorded no contacts and reached the goal in all five evaluation seeds. Its mean cost was
7.63 ± 0.44 and its obstacle-belief root-mean-square error was 3.52 ± 0.55 cm. The uncertainty-estimation abla-
tion also recorded no contacts but reached the goal in four of five seeds, with mean cost 8.96 ± 2.08 and belief
error 11.08 ± 1.23 cm. A finite-training bound clarifies replay exposure, and a robust barrier condition states the
required estimation-error and feasibility assumptions. The results support coupling estimation, safety filtering, and
replay on this benchmark; broader safety and convergence claims require further study.
Keywords: Reinforcement learning, Actor-critic control, Control barrier functions, Experience replay, Online
uncertainty estimation, Nonlinear optimal control, Safe optimal control
Data and code availability
All numerical results were generated specifically for this study by executing the accompanying im-
plementation on the common benchmark; none was copied from a prior publication.
Code, determin-
istic seeds, data, figures, and protocol files are archived as version v1.1.0 at https://doi.org/10.
5281/zenodo.21515850;
the development repository is available at https://github.com/SDNT8810/
safe-actor-critic-aer-ue-reproducibility. For the reader’s convenience, the Supplementary Material
has been appended to the end of this arXiv version. References to “Table S#” and “Figure S#” indicate the
corresponding items in the Supplementary Material section.
1. Introduction
The control of nonlinear systems under state and input constraints remains a central problem in modern control,
robotics, and intelligent decision-making. In many practical settings, the controller must optimize a performance
criterion while simultaneously handling safety restrictions, partial model knowledge, exogenous disturbances, and
limited data. Reinforcement learning (RL), especially in its actor-critic form, offers a flexible route toward ap-
proximate optimal control in such settings because it can combine value-function approximation, online policy
improvement, and nonlinear function approximation within one computational pipeline [1, 2]. However, the suc-
cessful deployment of RL-based controllers in safety-critical systems is still far from routine.
Two obstacles have become especially prominent. The first is safety during learning and execution. Standard
actor-critic methods may generate transient actions that are locally useful from a reward viewpoint but unacceptable
with respect to hard state or input constraints. The second is performance degradation under uncertainty. Even
when a safe policy is found for a nominal model, the closed loop may deteriorate substantially if the environment
contains unmodeled dynamics, time-varying disturbances, or distribution shifts. In addition, sample reuse—the
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: mahshad.rastegarmoghaddam@mail.polimi.it (Mahshad Rastegarmoghaddam), davoudnikkhoy@gmail.com
(Davoud Nikkhouy), shima.samadzade@gmail.com (Shima Samadzadeh)
arXiv:2608.04732v1  [eess.SY]  5 Aug 2026


mechanism that makes off-policy RL computationally attractive - is itself a double-edged sword: naive replay can
introduce stale, redundant, or misleading information, especially near constraint boundaries.
Recent literature has addressed these issues from different angles. A strong line of work integrates control
barrier functions (CBFs) into RL to create safety filters or safety-aware Bellman updates [3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. A second
line revisits replay design, emphasizing that the quality, diversity, and temporal relevance of retained transitions
can strongly affect learning stability and efficiency [9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. A third line studies uncertainty-aware
or disturbance-aware optimal control, often in continuous time, where recurrent networks, adaptive critics, and
observer-based designs are used to estimate unknown dynamics online [14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Yet these directions
are still often developed in partial isolation.
This paper argues that safe actor-critic optimal control should be designed as an integrated architecture rather
than as a sequence of loosely connected add-ons. In particular, replay and uncertainty estimation should not be
treated as auxiliary implementation choices. They should be regarded as structural components that determine
what the critic learns, what the safety layer observes, and how the policy responds near the safe-set boundary. This
viewpoint is motivated by three recent lines of work: (i) safe actor-critic reinforcement learning with CBFs and
experience replay for constrained optimal control problems [20]; (ii) a bi-level architecture that combines a long
short-term memory (LSTM) uncertainty estimator with an actor-critic policy for nonlinear systems with uncertain
dynamics [21]; and (iii) a self-organizing dual-buffer adaptive clustering experience replay mechanism for safe
optimal control, with emphasis on memory efficiency and safety-critical replay selection [22]. The present work
implements four interfaces: estimator-to-CBF geometry [20], estimator-to-replay priority [21], CBF-to-replay pri-
ority [22], and executed-transition-to-critic learning. The central message is straightforward: safe actor-critic
control, adaptive replay, and online uncertainty estimation should be co-designed. When this co-design principle
is ignored, one often obtains good nominal learning but fragile safety, robust safety but poor sample efficiency, or
accurate adaptation with insufficient replay diversity. When it is respected, a more balanced architecture becomes
possible.
The main contributions of the present manuscript can be summarized as follows:
1. The paper synthesizes three research directions that are often treated separately in safe reinforcement learning
for nonlinear optimal control: safety filtering, adaptive experience replay, and online uncertainty estimation.
2. It formulates an integrated architectural viewpoint in which the nominal actor-critic policy, the safety filter, the
replay manager, and the uncertainty estimator are explicitly co-designed.
3. It clarifies the integration gap in the recent literature through a structured comparison of representative work
strands.
4. It provides a compact design template for future methods, including an augmented replay representation, a
modular learning loop, and a formal result on the relevance of boundary-critical samples.
5. It highlights the applicability of the proposed perspective across distinct domains, including robotics, au-
tonomous systems, and epidemiological control.
6. It makes the template testable through explicit replay scores, a finite-training bound, a conditional robust-CBF
inequality, and a six-configuration simulation study.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature. Section 3 formulates
the continuous-time constrained control problem. Section 4 presents the integrated viewpoint and algorithmic
template. Section 5 reports the controlled numerical validation. Section 6 discusses the evidence, limitations, and
application bridges. Section 7 concludes the paper.
2. Related Literature
The literature that motivates the present paper is scattered across several communities that do not always
speak to one another directly. Control-theoretic studies emphasize stability, constraint satisfaction, and continuous-
time structure; reinforcement-learning papers emphasize data efficiency and policy improvement; and application
papers often focus on domain performance without isolating the architectural causes of success or failure. For that
reason, the following review is organized around four recurring themes rather than around application areas alone.
This organization makes it easier to see where the current literature already offers solid foundations and where a
genuine integration problem still remains.
2.1. Safe actor-critic optimal control
A major advance in safe RL has been the incorporation of barrier-based conditions into policy learning or
policy execution. CBF-based quadratic programs provide one rigorous way to ensure forward invariance of a safe
2


set for safety-critical systems [3]. Building on this principle, safe RL methods have employed barrier inequalities
either as online action-correction filters or as terms embedded directly in learning updates. Marvi and Kiumarsi
[4] formulated safe RL through CBF optimization, while more recent studies have extended the approach to off-
policy learning, affine nonlinear systems with saturation, and transportation applications [5, 6, 7, 8]. These works
demonstrate that safety need not be treated as an external supervisory layer only; it can also be reflected in the
value-update mechanism itself.
At the same time, the existing literature reveals a recurring trade-off. Strong safety filters protect the system
but may distort the exploratory data on which the actor and critic are trained. If this distortion is ignored, the
critic may learn an inconsistent value landscape. Conversely, if the actor is trained only on nominal transitions
while the executed control is filtered, policy improvement may become unnecessarily slow. This observation
already suggests that replay management must become safety-aware, since the buffer effectively determines what
distribution the critic sees.
The application-oriented literature confirms the same point. In autonomous driving, safe soft actor-critic meth-
ods combined with disturbance-observer-based CBF filters improve robustness when the nominal vehicle model is
inaccurate [7]. In powertrain control and motion planning, safe RL methods also benefit from explicit constrained
optimal-control formulations [23, 8]. These contributions are valuable, but they also indicate that safety alone is
not enough. Once the model is uncertain or the data are nonstationary, safety filtering must interact with adaptation
and replay.
2.2. Experience replay beyond uniform sampling
Experience replay is one of the most consequential ideas in modern RL because it decouples sample collection
from parameter updates and therefore improves both data efficiency and numerical stability [9, 11]. Prioritized
replay further refines this idea by sampling transitions with larger temporal-difference error more frequently [12].
In practice, however, neither uniform replay nor simple priority scores are sufficient for safety-critical optimal
control.
The reason is structural. In control tasks with state constraints, not all experiences carry equal information.
Transitions near the safe-set boundary often contain disproportionately valuable information about the action-
correction mechanism, barrier tightness, and feasibility margin. Likewise, transitions associated with abrupt dis-
turbance changes can be more informative for uncertainty-aware policy adaptation than transitions collected in
well-behaved nominal regimes. From this perspective, the replay buffer is not a passive data store; it is a com-
pressed representation of the system’s operational history.
Some application works already point in this direction. Hindsight experience replay has been shown to im-
prove shared-control and robotic-manipulation settings by retaining task-relevant alternative outcomes [13]. Safe
manipulation formulations under constrained Markov decision processes also show that task success and safe data
efficiency must be handled jointly [24]. Recent investigations of hybrid safe RL under distribution shift similarly
underline the need for replay and uncertainty modeling to work together rather than separately [25]. These studies
motivate a more adaptive replay design, especially when the control task is nonlinear, continuous-time, and safety-
constrained. Khalili-Amirabadi et al. [22] use fast and clustered slow buffers to preserve recency, diversity, and
safety relevance. The present experiment instead uses a simpler finite mixed-priority buffer and does not claim to
reproduce their complete algorithm.
2.3. Online uncertainty estimation in continuous-time optimal control
The literature on continuous-time adaptive critic control and approximate dynamic programming has long rec-
ognized that optimality and robustness cannot be separated cleanly [14, 15]. If disturbances or model mismatches
are ignored, the critic approximates the wrong value function; if uncertainty estimation is inaccurate, policy updates
can become either overly conservative or unstable.
Recent work has expanded this viewpoint. Echo-state and recurrent neural networks have been used for fault-
tolerant and adaptive control, indicating that temporal memory can improve disturbance representation beyond
static feedforward approximators [16, 19]. Event-based and value-iteration-based robust adaptive critics continue
this line by combining identification mechanisms with performance guarantees for nonaffine or disturbed systems
[17, 18]. In parallel, application studies such as underwater-vehicle tracking demonstrate that recurrent archi-
tectures and attention mechanisms can be useful when disturbances evolve over time rather than appearing as
white-noise perturbations [26].
A relevant recent study is the bi-level LSTM-empowered actor-critic framework [21]. There, the policy-
optimization problem and the uncertainty-estimation problem are treated as two coupled layers. This separation
improves interpretability and supports stability analysis under uncertain continuous-time dynamics. Conceptually,
the importance of that result extends beyond the particular robot example. It indicates that uncertainty estimation
should not be appended after policy training. It should shape the learning loop itself.
3


2.4. Application bridges: robotics, autonomous systems, and health
A useful test of any integrated perspective is whether it transfers across domains. Safe RL for navigation
and cooperative manipulation shows that barrier-based safety and adaptive decision-making can be productive in
robotics [27, 28]. At the same time, epidemiological control offers a quite different testbed, with slow state evolu-
tion, constrained interventions, and strong policy-safety interpretation. The HPV study by Khalili-Amirabadi et al.
[20] is important in this regard because it demonstrates that safe actor-critic ideas are not confined to mechanical
systems; they can also support constrained public-health decision-making.
Taken together, the literature suggests a clear gap. Safety, replay design, and uncertainty estimation are all
recognized as important, but a unifying control-oriented view is still missing. The next sections aim to articulate
such a view.
2.5. Recent event-triggered ADP and relevant CAEE studies
Recent event-triggered adaptive dynamic programming (ADP) papers address adjacent but distinct questions.
Hu et al. [29] combine integral RL, prescribed-performance transformation, and event triggering for multiplayer
nonlinear games. Qin et al. [30] use barrier transformation, a dynamic trigger, and critic-only experience re-
play for safe mixed zero-sum control. Related studies treat discontinuous state constraints [31] and actuator fail-
ures with full-state time-varying constraints [32]. These papers provide stronger plant-specific Lyapunov and
event-triggering analyses than the present benchmark. The present contribution is complementary: it focuses on
uncertainty-informed barrier geometry, executed-action critic learning, and realized finite-buffer safety/uncertainty
replay. Direct numerical ranking would be invalid because the plants, objectives, communication assumptions, and
constraint transformations differ.
Table 1 summarizes the main strands of related work from the viewpoint adopted in this paper and highlights
the still-open integration gap among safety filtering, replay design, and online uncertainty estimation.
Table 1: Comparison of representative related-work strands. Existing studies typically emphasize safety, replay, or uncertainty
adaptation in isolation; the present architecture co-designs the three components.
Work strand
Safety mechanism
Replay mechanism
Uncertainty estimator
Time setting
Main limitation
Safe RL with CBFs [4, 5, 3,
6]
CBF/QP safety filter
Usually standard replay
or not central
Usually none or implicit
nominal model
Both
Safety is explicit, but replay and uncertainty han-
dling are only weakly integrated.
Replay-centric RL [9, 11,
12, 13]
Usually none
Uniform, PER, or HER
None
Mostly discrete
Data efficiency improves, but safety-critical and
uncertainty-informative samples are not explicitly
preserved.
Adaptive critic/robust ADP
[15, 17, 18, 14]
Implicit
robustness,
rarely
explicit
safety
filtering
Usually absent
Identification or robust-
ness terms, but not mod-
ular replay-aware estima-
tion
Continuous
Strong control-theoretic basis, but limited replay de-
sign and weak explicit safety integration.
Recurrent uncertainty-aware
control [19, 16, 26]
Application-dependent
Usually absent
RNN, echo-state network,
attention, or LSTM
Continuous/
mixed
Good temporal uncertainty modeling, but not tightly
coupled with replay and safe actor-critic learning.
Application-level safe RL
[20, 7, 24, 27]
Domain-specific safety
layer or explicit con-
straints
Standard or moderate re-
play use
Sometimes
observer-
based
or
application-
specific
Mixed
Demonstrates practical value, but leaves the broader
integration problem unresolved.
Event-triggered constrained
ADP [29, 30, 31, 32]
Barrier transformation
or constrained control
Experience replay in se-
lected designs
Plant/fault observers in se-
lected designs
Continuous
Strong plant-specific stability and resource analysis;
uncertainty-aware finite-buffer replay is not the cen-
tral interface.
Related
HPV
component
study [20]
CBF-based safe actor-
critic control
Experience replay
No dedicated recurrent un-
certainty module
Continuous
Strong safety-oriented application bridge, but uncer-
tainty estimation is not a first-class coupled module.
Related LSTM bi-level com-
ponent study [21]
Safe/robust
control
structure
Replay
for
actor-critic
learning
LSTM-based online un-
certainty estimator
Continuous
Strong uncertainty estimation, but replay is not ex-
plicitly safety- and diversity-aware.
Related SODACER compo-
nent study [22]
Safe RL with CBFs
Dual-buffer clustered re-
play
No dedicated recurrent es-
timator
Continuous
Strong replay design, but uncertainty estimation is
not integrated as a coupled module.
Present work
CBF-based safe action
projection
Finite uniform, PER, or
mixed adaptive replay
Online causal obstacle be-
lief and scale
Continuous
plant/discrete
implementation
Evaluated on the stated two-dimensional bench-
mark; no general convergence or hardware claim.
3. Problem Formulation
We consider a class of nonlinear continuous-time control systems
˙x(t) = f(x(t))+g(x(t))u(t)+d(t),
(1)
where x(t) ∈Rn denotes the state, u(t) ∈Rm is the control input, f and g are smooth dynamics, and d(t) denotes
a lumped uncertainty term that may include exogenous disturbances, parametric mismatch, unmodeled nonlinear-
ities, and measurement-related effects. The control must satisfy admissibility bounds
u(t) ∈U := {u ∈Rm : |ui| ≤¯ui, i = 1,...,m},
(2)
and the state must remain in a safe set
Xsafe := {x ∈Rn : h j(x) ≥0, j = 1,...,r}.
(3)
4


The nominal optimal-control objective is to minimize an infinite-horizon performance index of the form
J(x0,u) =
Z ∞
0 e−νtℓ(x(t),u(t))dt,
(4)
where ν > 0 is a discount factor and ℓ(x,u) is a positive-definite running cost, often chosen as a weighted sum
of tracking error and control effort. In continuous-time actor-critic formulations, the value function V(x) satisfies
a Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman relation at least approximately, and the actor is updated using the critic gradient or a
policy-gradient surrogate [14, 15].
If safety were absent and d(t) were known, one could attempt a standard approximate dynamic-programming
or actor-critic construction. In the present setting, however, three complications must be addressed simultaneously:
1. the system should remain inside Xsafe during learning and execution;
2. the critic should learn from replayed data without being dominated by redundant or stale transitions; and
3. the uncertainty d(t) should be estimated online well enough to preserve both performance and safety.
These three requirements motivate the integrated architecture developed in the next section. For convenience,
Table 2 summarizes the principal symbols that appear in the integrated architecture and the subsequent discussion.
Table 2: Core notation used in the integrated safe actor-critic architecture.
Symbol
Meaning
xt,xt+1
Current and next states
ua,t
Nominal actor action before safety correction
ut
Executed safe action after safety filtering
rt
Instantaneous reward or cost feedback
ˆdt
Estimated lumped uncertainty
ζt
Recent trajectory window for uncertainty estimation
Πsafe
Safety filter based on barrier constraints
Vω(x)
Critic value approximation
πθ(x)
Actor policy
ξt
Augmented replay transition
st,et,nt
Safety, uncertainty, and novelty scores for replay prioritization
δt
Temporal-difference error
pt
Replay priority
λ•
Weights in mixed replay prioritization, where • represents TD, safe, unc, or
nov
4. Toward an Integrated Architecture
The preceding discussion suggests that the next step is not merely to add another component to an existing safe
RL pipeline, but to rethink the way the main modules exchange information. In particular, the replay buffer should
not be treated as a passive storage unit, the uncertainty estimator should not be viewed as an optional add-on, and
the safety filter should not be regarded as a purely post hoc correction layer. Instead, these modules should be
designed as coupled elements of one learning architecture. The purpose of this section is therefore to articulate a
compact design view that can support future algorithm development in a principled and application-independent
manner.
4.1. Design principle
The key idea is to separate the learning system into four interacting modules:
1. a nominal actor-critic module that proposes control actions for approximate optimality;
2. a safety filter based on CBF inequalities that corrects unsafe actions;
3. an online uncertainty estimator that provides a running estimate ˆd(t) of the lumped uncertainty; and
4. an adaptive replay manager that decides which transitions should be retained and how they should be resampled.
5


The novelty of the viewpoint advocated here lies not in the mere identification of these components, but in the
way their interactions are explicitly structured. The safety filter should use the uncertainty estimate, because barrier
feasibility and future-state prediction depend on disturbance knowledge. The replay manager should use both the
safety layer and the uncertainty estimator, because transitions close to barrier activation or with large estimation
residuals are especially informative. The critic should be updated on the basis of the executed safe control, not
merely the nominal actor output, because that is the action that truly determines the closed-loop trajectory.
Figure 1 summarizes the integrated viewpoint advocated in this paper. Rather than treating safety filtering,
replay design, and uncertainty estimation as loosely connected auxiliary mechanisms, the diagram emphasizes
their mutual dependence within a single learning-and-control loop. In particular, the executed safe action, rather
than the nominal actor output alone, determines the plant trajectory, the replay content, and ultimately the critic
update. Likewise, the uncertainty estimator informs safety correction, while the replay manager preserves the
transitions that are most informative for both safe control and adaptive learning.
Figure 1: Integrated four-module architecture for safe actor-critic optimal control with adaptive experience replay and online
uncertainty estimation.
In the generic formulation, ˆd represents uncertainty in the plant dynamics. The experiment instantiates the
same estimator-to-safety interface for perception uncertainty: a causal filter estimates static obstacle centers and
their scales from detector data, these estimates define the barrier geometry, and plant disturbance is handled only
through the fixed allowance ¯d. The experiment therefore does not implement online disturbance identification, an
LSTM, or a clustered dual buffer. The controller uses only observable states, detector outputs, estimator beliefs,
actions, filter activity, and contact events. True obstacle centers and clearances are reserved for simulation and
evaluation; Supplementary Table S2 gives the complete information contract and its invariance audit.
4.2. Nominal actor-critic and safe action correction
Let the critic approximate a value function Vω(x) with parameters ω, and let the nominal actor produce an
action ua = πθ(x) with parameters θ. The executed control is then obtained from a safety-correction stage,
u(t) = Πsafe
 x(t),ua(t), ˆd(t)

,
(5)
where Πsafe denotes a filter that returns the closest admissible action satisfying the CBF constraints. In a standard
formulation, the filter may solve a quadratic program of the form
min
u∈U
∥u−ua∥2
R
s.t.
∇hj(x)⊤ f(x)+g(x)u+ ˆd(x)

+αj
 hj(x)

≥0,
(6)
for all active safety constraints j = 1,...,r, where R ≻0 and αj(·) is an extended class-K function [3, 4]. Equa-
tion (6) highlights a point that is sometimes understated in the RL literature: the safety filter is model-dependent.
6


If the estimate ˆd is poor, the filter may either become too conservative or fail to protect the true system adequately.
Hence, uncertainty estimation and safety correction should be treated as coupled computations.
This coupling does not by itself guarantee recursive feasibility. Suppose
d(x)−ˆd(x)
 ≤¯ed and the error in
the estimated barrier geometry contributes at most ¯eh to its derivative. A sufficient robust inequality is
∇ˆh(x)⊤ f(x)+g(x)u+ ˆd(x)

+α(ˆh(x)) ≥
∇ˆh(x)
 ¯ed + ¯eh.
If these bounds are valid and the robust admissible-action set is nonempty at every relevant state, the true derivative
satisfies the intended CBF condition. If a bound is underestimated, the estimator is miscalibrated, the relative de-
gree changes, or the input constraints make the robust set empty, forward invariance and recursive feasibility are not
guaranteed. The benchmark filter below is therefore reported as an empirical robustification, not an unconditional
certificate.
4.3. Online uncertainty estimation
The uncertainty estimator can be implemented in several ways, depending on the domain and computational
budget. Observer-based adaptive critics, echo-state networks, diagonal recurrent neural networks, and LSTM
architectures are all reasonable candidates [16, 19, 17, 26]. In the present perspective, the estimator is updated
online from recent state-control trajectories,
ˆd(t) = Eφ(ζt),
(7)
where Eφ is a parameterized estimator and ζt denotes a window of current and past states and controls. The
LSTM-based bi-level framework in Khalili-Amirabadi et al. [21] is especially relevant because it demonstrates
how uncertainty estimation can be separated from, yet still coupled to, policy optimization.
For conceptual clarity, we recommend two design rules:
1. uncertainty estimation should be trained on transitions collected under the executed safe policy, not a purely
nominal one; and
2. estimator confidence or residual magnitude should be made available to the replay manager.
The second rule is important. A transition with a large temporal-difference error may be useful for critic training,
but a transition with a small temporal-difference error and a very large uncertainty residual may still be crucial for
model adaptation and future safety.
4.4. Adaptive experience replay
In standard replay, each transition is stored as (xt,ut,rt,xt+1). In safe actor-critic control, this tuple is often
insufficient. We advocate storing an augmented tuple,
ξt = (xt,ua,t,ut,rt,xt+1,σt,ρt,ηt),
(8)
where ua,t is the nominal actor action, ut is the executed safe action, σt is a safety-related observable such as barrier
slack or filter activation, ρt is an uncertainty-related observable such as an estimation residual norm, and ηt is a
recency or context descriptor.
The experimental implementation also stores the exploration vector and active waypoint index required by its
replayed actor update. Supplementary Table S2 lists the complete controller-visible record, including filter activity,
estimator innovation, detector validity, and observable jump scores; evaluator-only true geometry is excluded.
This augmented representation allows the replay manager to preserve three types of transitions:
1. safety-critical transitions, for which the CBF filter was active or nearly active;
2. uncertainty-informative transitions, for which the estimator residual was large or the operating regime changed
abruptly; and
3. representative nominal transitions, which preserve coverage of the ordinary operating regime.
This view naturally motivates dual-buffer or clustered replay. The SODACER work provides one implementa-
tion by combining a fast buffer for short-horizon adaptation with a clustered slow buffer for long-horizon diversity
and redundancy control [22]. Conceptually, the clustered slow buffer is appealing because it compresses repeated
nominal experiences and reserves memory for rare but structurally important transitions.
A generic sampling score may be written as
pt = λTD ¯δt +λsafest +λuncet +λnovnt,
(9)
where ¯δt is a normalized temporal-difference score, st is a safety-importance score, et is an uncertainty score, and
nt is a novelty or diversity score. The weights λ• are design parameters.
7


The implementation converts the raw observables (σt,ρt,ηt) in Eq. (8) into bounded dimensionless scores in
Eq. (9):
¯δt = min

1, |δt|
2.5

,
(10)
st = min
 
1,e−max(˜ht,0)/0.075 +0.341CBF,t
+0.30min

1, ∥ut −ua,t∥
0.11

+0.751contact,t
!
,
(11)
et = min
 
1, 0.58
K
K
∑
i=1
νi,t
max(2.5σi,t,0.030)
+0.30 ¯jt +0.28(1−¯vt)),
(12)
nt = min
 
1,
1
p
1+Nt(cell(xt))
!
.
(13)
where ˜ht is estimated barrier slack, νi,t is causal estimator innovation, ¯jt is the mean observable detector-jump
score, ¯vt is the mean measurement-validity indicator, and Nt is the prior occupancy of the state cell. All distances
in the denominators are in meters. The mixed weights are
(λTD,λsafe,λunc,λnov) = (0.18,0.39,0.30,0.13),
(14)
and 10−5 is added to every priority. For a retained buffer D, the executable sampler tempers the priority and
samples a mini-batch without replacement. At each sequential draw it uses
Pr(i | D) =
pβ
i
∑k∈D pβ
k
,
β = 0.78 for AER/Full,
(15)
with the denominator recomputed over the not-yet-selected entries. PER uses temporal-difference priority alone
and β = 0.68, whereas the uniform methods sample without replacement with equal probability. Thus Eq. (9) is
not left as an unnormalized heuristic. The values are fixed engineering choices, not claimed global optima; the
Supplementary Material reports a post-hoc one-at-a-time weight sensitivity diagnostic and does not use it to select
the reported configuration.
Proposition 1 (finite-training exposure of a retained critical transition). Consider a finite replay buffer
and M subsequent replay draws. Let i be a safety-critical transition that remains stored during those draws. If its
conditional probability of selection at draw m, given the complete history Fm−1, satisfies
Pr(i selected at draw m | Fm−1) ≥pmin > 0,
(16)
then
Pr(i is never selected in the next M draws) ≤(1−pmin)M ≤e−Mpmin,
(17)
and consequently
Pr(i is selected at least once) ≥1−e−Mpmin.
(18)
If the total conditional sampling mass assigned to the currently retained critical set C is at least qmin > 0 on every
draw, then the probability that no critical transition is sampled in M draws is at most e−Mqmin, and the expected
number of critical draws is at least Mqmin.
Proof. By the chain rule,
Pr(i never selected) =
M
∏
m=1
Pr(i not selected at m | i was not selected earlier)
(19)
≤(1−pmin)M ≤e−Mpmin.
(20)
The critical-set statement follows by replacing the individual event with selection from C . If Zm indicates a critical
draw, then E[Zm | Fm−1] ≥qmin, and linearity of expectation gives E[∑M
m=1 Zm] ≥Mqmin.
□
The retained-transition condition is essential. Proposition 1 is a replay-exposure result, not an eviction guar-
antee, actor-critic convergence theorem, or closed-loop invariance theorem. This is why the experiment audits
generated, retained, and sampled event fractions separately.
8


For the implemented N = 360 buffer, the priority floor gives the deliberately loose bound pmin ≥3.51×10−7
and only 1 −e−Mpmin ≈0.00123 over M = 3520 draw positions. This M is the maximum available across a full
run for a transition inserted before the first replay update and retained throughout; later arrivals have fewer oppor-
tunities. We therefore assess practical coverage using the observed generation, retention, and sampling fractions
in Supplementary Table S10 rather than this worst-case floor.
4.5. Integrated learning loop
Algorithm 1 summarizes the proposed perspective.
Algorithm 1 Integrated safe actor-critic learning with adaptive replay and uncertainty estimation
1: Initialize critic parameters ω, actor parameters θ, estimator parameters φ, and replay memory D.
2: for each interaction step t do
3:
Observe state xt.
4:
Compute nominal action ua,t = πθ(xt).
5:
Estimate uncertainty ˆdt = Eφ(ζt).
6:
Compute safe executed action ut = Πsafe(xt,ua,t, ˆdt).
7:
Apply ut; observe reward rt and next state xt+1.
8:
Compute safety score st, uncertainty score et, and novelty score nt.
9:
Store augmented transition ξt in replay memory D.
10:
Sample a mini-batch using a mixed priority based on TD, safety, uncertainty, and diversity.
11:
Update the critic using executed safe transitions.
12:
Update the actor using the current critic and safety-aware targets.
13:
Update the estimator using recent trajectory windows or replayed uncertainty-informative samples.
14:
Periodically compress, cluster, or rebalance the replay memory when the chosen replay design requires it.
15: end for
In the experiment, belief and action updates occur at every step, whereas actor–critic replay updates occur after
each episode. The critic is fitted to realized costs and next states following the executed safe action. The waypoint
actor uses the critic’s clipped temporal-difference residual and stored exploration draw in a replay-weighted score-
function update. Because no importance ratios are used, this is a biased off-policy surrogate; no isolated gain from
the learned value baseline is claimed.
4.6. Why integration matters
The expected advantages of the integrated architecture can be summarized in four points:
1. Critic consistency. If the critic is updated using executed safe actions and safety-aware replay, then the learned
value function is more closely aligned with the true closed-loop behavior than in a nominal-only training setup.
This reduces the mismatch between the policy that is proposed and the policy that is actually executed.
2. Informative replay. Adaptive replay can preserve rare but highly informative transitions associated with bar-
rier activation, abrupt disturbance changes, or regime shifts. These are precisely the transitions that standard
uniform replay tends to under-represent.
3. Reliable safety filtering. If the safety filter receives online uncertainty estimates rather than relying on a fixed
nominal model, then barrier constraints can better reflect the true local dynamics. This improves the practical
reliability of action correction under model mismatch.
4. Cross-domain transferability. Because the architecture is modular, it can inform designs across applications
with very different physical interpretations. In robotics, d(t) may represent slip, contact variation, or actua-
tor uncertainty; in epidemiological control, it may reflect time-varying transmission, compliance variation, or
intervention mismatch.
Taken together, these four points explain why the proposed perspective is more than a simple aggregation
of existing ingredients. Its value lies in making the interactions among learning, safety, replay, and uncertainty
estimation explicit at the architectural level.
Figure 2 provides a compact design map that situates the proposed perspective within a broader class of safe
actor-critic architectures. The figure is not intended as a rigid taxonomy, but as a practical guideline: as uncertainty
becomes more structured and safety requirements become more stringent, the architecture must evolve from a basic
actor-critic controller toward a fully integrated design in which safety filtering, replay management, and online
uncertainty estimation are explicitly co-designed.
9


Figure 2: A design map for selecting an appropriate safe actor-critic architecture based on uncertainty complexity and safety
criticality. The upper-right quadrant corresponds to the main focus of this paper, namely settings in which safety-aware replay
and online uncertainty estimation should be co-designed with the nominal actor-critic policy and the safety filter.
Figure 3 summarizes when basic replay is sufficient and when safety, structured uncertainty, and replay non-
stationarity motivate a more integrated design. The complementary design taxonomy is retained as Supplementary
Figure S8.
Figure 3: Practical guide for selecting replay and uncertainty-estimation components.
Figure 3 and Supplementary Figure S8 are conceptual guides rather than descriptions of the implemented
estimator and buffer. The static-center filter used below is appropriate only for physically static obstacles.
5. Experimental Validation
5.1. Benchmark, observation process, and data partition
The benchmark is a 3.20m × 3.20m cluttered workspace with known rectangular obstacles and two hidden-
center circular obstacles. The robot radius is 0.062m, the continuous planar velocity is limited to 0.72m/s, and
10


the integration step is 0.055s. The start and goal are (0.22,2.82)m and (1.62,1.58)m. The two uncertain obstacle
centers are (0.82,1.60)m and (1.82,0.92)m, with radii 0.070m and 0.100m. These physical obstacles remain
static.
For uncertain obstacle i, the common detector reports
zi(t) = ci +bi +wcorr
i
(t)+vi(t)+dsin
i (t)+ ji(t),
(21)
when a measurement is valid. Here ci is the hidden static center, bi is episode-level registration bias, wcorr
i
is colored
drift, vi is white jitter, dsin
i
is smooth drift, and ji is a temporary localization jump. During an intermittent hold, the
prior report is repeated and the validity bit is set to zero. For a fixed seed, episode identifier, and severity, every
method receives the same arrays of detector centers, validity bits, observable jump scores, exploration draws, and
plant disturbance.
Each method is trained for 10 episodes of 115 transitions and evaluated, without further learning, for 280
transitions over five paired seeds. Goal success is entry into a 5.5 cm tolerance. The procedurally generated
experiment has a training partition but no independent validation set. Evaluation comprises a moderate multiplier
2.2, an eleven-level perception-noise sweep, and an exploratory multiplier-6.0 test selected after the initial analysis.
Supplementary Tables S1–S3 give the complete protocol and parameters.
At multiplier 6.0, detector bias is 6.0–11.4 cm, smooth drift reaches 5.4 cm, temporary jumps begin at 30–42
cm, and intermittent holds repeat stale measurements. The detector nevertheless reports a 1 cm standard deviation,
representing overconfidence under distribution shift. The plant-disturbance multiplier remains 1.0; Supplementary
Table S1 gives the full timing and noise model.
The simulated plant and evaluation objective are fully discrete and use the executed post-filter velocity:
pt+1 = clipΩ[pt +0.055(ut +dt)],
∥ut∥≤0.72,
(22)
ℓt = 0.036∥pt −g∥2 +0.020∥ut∥2 +0.012∥ut −ua,t∥2 +0.036∥ut −ua,t∥
+5.21contact,t +max

0,0.010−hknown
t
2
.
(23)
Here dt is the shared exogenous velocity disturbance, Ωclips the robot center to the workspace after accounting for
its radius, g is the goal, and hknown
t
is signed clearance from the known map. The contact indicator is an observable
bumper event; hidden true geometry is used to generate and evaluate contact but is not stored as a continuous
learning signal. Supplementary Tables S1–S3 give the complete protocol, stored-field schema, waypoint/corridor
constraints, and all actor, critic, potential-field, estimator, CBF, and buffer constants.
5.2. Progressive comparison configurations and common tuning budget
The comparison is progressive and component-matched. AC is the common waypoint actor–critic with uni-
form replay. AC+CBF adds CBF projection [3, 4]; AC+CBF+PER adds temporal-difference prioritized replay [12];
AC+CBF+UE adds online uncertainty estimation [7, 21]; and AC+CBF+AER adds adaptive safety-aware replay [22].
Full combines the estimator and adaptive replay with the safety filter. These are controlled in-house configura-
tions, not copied results or exact reproductions of the cited methods, whose plants and objectives differ.
Table 3: Progressive component-wise comparison. All configurations share the plant, cost, actor–critic update, training budget,
seeds, and sensor, exploration, and disturbance streams. References identify the motivating literature strand.
Method
CBF
PER
UE
AER
Description
AC [1]
no
no
no
no
Waypoint actor–critic with a replay-weighted TD-residual score-
function surrogate and uniform replay.
AC+CBF [3, 4]
yes
no
no
no
CBF uses the common raw or held detector center.
AC+CBF+PER [12]
yes
yes
no
no
Temporal-difference priority only.
AC+CBF+UE [21]
yes
no
yes
no
Robust online static-center filter with uniform replay.
AC+CBF+AER [22]
yes
no
no
yes
Mixed adaptive replay; the CBF still uses the raw or held center.
Full (present)
yes
no
yes
yes
Online filter, replay-calibrated static anchor, robust CBF, and mixed
replay.
All configurations use the same 10 training episodes, buffer capacity 360, batch size 44, eight replay updates
per episode, and five seeds. No method-specific hyperparameter search or independent validation set was used;
the common hand-fixed values are listed in Supplementary Table S3. The post-hoc ±20% replay-weight check in
Table S4 was not used to choose the reported configuration. This controls differential tuning but does not make
every ablation individually optimal.
11


The estimator produces a causal center belief ˆci,t, scale σi,t, and innovation νi,t =
zi,t −ˆci,t|t−1
; invalid mea-
surements receive zero gain, and no true center label is used. For a circular obstacle, the filter uses
ˆhi(p,t) = ∥p−ˆci(t)∥−
 ri +rR +ρi(t)

,
ρi(t) = 0.009+1.20σi(t),
(24)
and projects the velocity onto active half-space approximations of
∇ˆhi(p,t)⊤u ≥−α ˆhi(p,t)+ ¯d +(0.18s−1)ρi(t),
(25)
subject to the input limits. Here ¯d = 0.012m/s is a design allowance, not a hard stochastic bound, and 0.18s−1 con-
verts the distance envelope ρi into a velocity margin. Known rectangles and workspace walls receive a discrete-time
guard; the experiment therefore evaluates an empirical robustification rather than a certified stochastic guarantee.
5.3. Metrics and statistical analysis
Safety is evaluated against hidden true geometry. The signed clearance is
ht = min
i
 pt −ctrue
i
−ri −rR

,
(26)
combined with distances to known rectangles and workspace walls. True clearance is evaluation-only. We report
cost, violations, clearance, belief RMSE, goal performance, filter intervention, and runtime as mean ± sample
standard deviation over five paired seeds. Friedman tests compare all configurations and paired Wilcoxon tests
compare each ablation with Full; the p-values are unadjusted exploratory diagnostics. Supplementary Tables S5–
S10 and Figures S1–S2 provide seed-level results, complete tests, replay fractions, and additional plots.
5.4. Additional exploratory extreme-stress results
Table 4 reports the multiplier-6.0 test. Safety, goal completion, cost, and estimation error are interpreted jointly.
Table 4: Selected metrics from the extreme perception-stress test at multiplier 6.0 (mean ± sample standard deviation over five
seeds). Best means are bold; arrows indicate the preferred direction. Supplementary Table S6 reports all metrics.
Method
Cost ↓
Viol. ↓
Min. global h ↑
Uncertain clear. ↑
Belief RMSE ↓
Goal success ↑
(%)
(cm)
(cm)
(cm)
(%)
AC [1, 2]
46.99±19.28
2.79±1.32
−1.76±0.80
−1.76±0.80
16.71±1.55
100.0±0.0
AC+CBF [3, 4]
31.00±12.43
1.64±0.86
−1.26±0.40
−1.26±0.40
16.71±1.55
100.0±0.0
AC+CBF+PER [12]
39.08±24.08
2.21±1.64
−1.04±1.91
−1.04±1.91
16.71±1.55
100.0±0.0
AC+CBF+UE [21]
8.96±2.08
0.00±0.00
3.22±2.81
3.94±3.37
11.08±1.23
80.0±44.7
AC+CBF+AER [22]
22.62±12.82
1.07±0.87
−0.35±1.55
−0.35±1.55
16.71±1.55
100.0±0.0
Full (present)
7.63±0.44
0.00±0.00
2.71±0.23
6.95±0.26
3.52±0.55
100.0±0.0
UE and Full are the only configurations with zero contacts; Full reaches the goal in five of five seeds versus
four of five for UE and has lower mean cost and belief error. Friedman tests detect differences in cost, violations,
clearance, and belief RMSE (p ≤0.0045), but the paired Full–UE tests do not reach p < 0.05. The result is
therefore a practically relevant joint trend on this benchmark, not proof of universal superiority. Complete seed-
level and statistical results are in Supplementary Tables S6–S9.
5.5. Finite-buffer replay audit
Supplementary Table S10 separates event generation, finite-buffer retention, and replay sampling. AER and
Full retain boundary events strongly, while Full also increases retention and sampling of observable uncertainty
events.
5.6. Moderate test, learning behavior, and robustness sweep
At multiplier 2.2, every CBF configuration is collision-free in all five seeds, whereas AC records contact in two.
Full has the lowest belief RMSE and the largest clearance; the complete moderate results are in Supplementary
Table S5.
The sweep and multiplier-6.0 test characterize the chosen observation model; they do not define a certified
uncertainty radius.
5.7. Computation and reproducibility
With I projection sweeps, J active constraints, and action dimension m = 2, the safety projection costs O(IJm).
Uniform replay retrieval is O(B), whereas the present transparent priority implementation scans N = 360 entries
and costs O(N + B) per batch; tree-based sampling could reduce priority operations to O(logN). Table 4 reports
machine-specific runtimes.
The executable code, protocol, common streams, seed-level results, and diagnostic tests are supplied as supple-
mentary software at https://github.com/SDNT8810/safe-actor-critic-aer-ue-reproducibility.
12


(a) Trajectories for visualization seed 4.
(b) True signed clearance over the displayed interval; h(t) < 0 is unsafe. Reported numerical metrics use the complete
registered evaluation horizon.
Figure 4: Extreme-stress trajectories and clearance. Hidden geometry is used only for evaluation.
13


Figure 5: Finite-buffer replay composition and sampling; numerical fractions are in Supplementary Table S10.
(a) Training cost under the increasing-severity curriculum; this is not
a fixed-task convergence curve.
(b) Violation rate versus perception severity.
Figure 6: Learning and robustness summaries. The sweep uses a fixed episode identifier across severity levels to reduce the
severity/random-realization confound.
14


6. Discussion and Application Bridges
Although the integrated viewpoint developed in this paper is intentionally general, it is useful to connect it
to recent studies that make its individual components concrete. Such a connection clarifies that the proposed
perspective is not speculative; its ingredients already appear in recent works, albeit in partially separated forms.
It also helps identify promising future contributions, not by repeating the individual components, but by showing
how they can be combined more systematically.
The present perspective is strongly motivated by recent studies that each illuminate one part of the integrated
architecture. Safe actor-critic control with experience replay and CBF-based constraints can be formulated mean-
ingfully even when the system is not mechanical. Khalili-Amirabadi et al. [20] show that safe RL can support
public-health intervention design under operational constraints, thereby establishing an application bridge for
safety-constrained actor-critic control. Their LSTM-based bi-level control study [21] demonstrates that online
uncertainty estimation and policy optimization can be decomposed into coupled layers for continuous-time non-
linear control. That work supplies the uncertainty-estimation bridge and shows why recurrent architectures may
be preferable to memoryless approximators when disturbances are temporally correlated. Moreover, replay should
explicitly balance short-term responsiveness and long-horizon diversity through dual-buffer and clustering mech-
anisms, as shown in the SODACER study [22]. That work supplies the adaptive replay bridge. Taken together,
these studies motivate the integrated view developed here.
6.1. What the ablation supports and why integration matters
The ablation supports three linked observations: corrupted geometry can defeat a nominal CBF, temporal-
difference priority does not reliably preserve uncertainty events, and adaptive replay cannot correct a wrong obsta-
cle belief without an estimator. Full combines uncertainty-informed geometry with boundary- and residual-aware
replay, yielding zero contacts and five-of-five goal completion in the extreme test. This is a joint benchmark result
rather than evidence that every component improves every metric.
6.2. Robotics, autonomous systems, and health-related design transfer
The most direct applications are mobile robotics and autonomous systems, where estimator error changes colli-
sion geometry and filter interventions identify valuable replay events [7, 27, 28]. The same interfaces could inform
constrained health-control models such as vaccination or treatment allocation [20], but this is a design-transfer
hypothesis only: the present experiment validates robot navigation, not clinical or public-health performance.
6.3. Modularity and its cost
Modularity is an engineering interface, not a plug-and-play convergence theorem. Replacing the static-center
filter with an LSTM, Kalman filter, ensemble, or disturbance observer changes the residual distribution, uncertainty
calibration, update timing, and valid error bound in the robust CBF inequality. A replacement must expose a
documented estimate, calibrated scale, innovation signal, and update rate. Stability and convergence must then be
re-established for the selected modules and time scales.
6.4. Limitations and open challenges
Despite its appeal, the integrated viewpoint raises several nontrivial challenges. From a theoretical standpoint,
combining adaptive replay, recurrent uncertainty estimation, and safety filtering substantially complicates closed-
loop analysis. Existing results typically address these components in isolation. A mature theory will likely require
separation arguments, incremental-stability tools, or restricted update schedules, in a manner broadly consistent
with recent bi-level analyses [21].
Computational burden is another important concern. Safety filters, recurrent estimators, and replay clustering
all introduce additional overhead. The practical question is whether the resulting gains in safety, robustness, and
sample efficiency justify this extra complexity. Cluster maintenance and asynchronous buffer updates, as suggested
in recent replay designs, may help mitigate this cost [22].
Replay prioritization also remains application-dependent. Although the mixed-priority form in Eq. (9) is con-
ceptually appealing, selecting appropriate weights and scales is not straightforward. Excessive emphasis on safety-
critical transitions may bias the critic toward boundary behavior, whereas insufficient emphasis may weaken safety
awareness. Similar considerations apply to uncertainty-related sampling.
Distribution shift and stale data remain persistent concerns in off-policy safe RL. Replayed samples may reflect
outdated operating regimes, especially in highly nonstationary environments. In such settings, hybrid offline-online
strategies and more robust uncertainty models may be necessary [25].
15


Finally, evaluation protocols should extend beyond reward or cost alone. Meaningful assessment should also
include constraint-violation rates, safety margins, estimator residuals, replay diversity, and computational load.
Without such a multi-metric evaluation framework, fair comparison among integrated methods remains difficult.
The validation is a two-dimensional simulation with lightweight function approximators, static physical obsta-
cles, five seeds, no independent validation set, and a synthetic extreme detector model selected after initial analysis.
The actor update lacks importance correction, the local weight check is post hoc, and the Gaussian disturbance has
no hard bound. Proposition 1 concerns replay exposure, not convergence or closed-loop invariance. These limits
restrict the evidence to this benchmark and motivate hardware, moving-obstacle, calibrated-sensing, and formal
multi-time-scale studies.
7. Conclusion
This paper has argued that safe actor-critic optimal control should be viewed as an integrated learning-and-
control architecture rather than as a nominal reinforcement-learning algorithm supplemented by a few auxiliary
corrections. The central thesis is that adaptive experience replay and online uncertainty estimation are not pe-
ripheral implementation details. They shape the data seen by the critic, the reliability of the safety filter, and the
responsiveness of the policy under model mismatch. From this standpoint, the proposed perspective contributes
three concrete messages. First, replay should preserve safety-critical and uncertainty-informative transitions rather
than relying exclusively on uniform or temporal-difference-error-based sampling. Second, uncertainty estimation
should be coupled to safe control, because barrier feasibility depends on the true local dynamics. Third, real-
ized transitions produced by the executed safe action, not only the nominal actor output, should drive state-value
critic learning and replay formation. The recent literature already contains strong building blocks for this agenda,
including CBF-based safe RL, robust adaptive critic control, recurrent uncertainty estimation, clustered or dual-
buffer replay, safe HPV control, bi-level LSTM-enhanced nonlinear optimal control, and SODACER-based replay
design. These studies make the complementarity of these building blocks particularly visible.
The finite-training bound, robust barrier condition, and component-wise experiment make the proposed inter-
faces testable. In the extreme test, Full records no contacts, reaches the goal in every seed, and has the lowest mean
cost and belief error. This supports the co-design hypothesis on the stated benchmark while leaving convergence,
certified safety, and hardware validation open.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the manuscript preparation process
During the preparation of this work, the authors used ChatGPT (OpenAI) solely for language editing to improve
English grammar. The authors reviewed and edited the output as needed and take full responsibility for the content
of the published article.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could
have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
References
[1] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, 2nd ed., MIT Press, 2018.
[2] S. E. Li, “Deep reinforcement learning,” in Reinforcement Learning for Sequential Decision and Optimal
Control, Springer, Singapore, 2023, pp. 365–402.
[3] A. D. Ames, X. Xu, J. W. Grizzle, and P. Tabuada, “Control barrier function based quadratic programs for
safety critical systems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 3861–3876, 2017, doi:
10.1109/TAC.2016.2638961.
[4] Z. Marvi and B. Kiumarsi, “Safe reinforcement learning: A control barrier function optimization ap-
proach,” International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1923–1940, 2021, doi:
10.1002/rnc.5392.
[5] M. S. Jha and B. Kiumarsi, “Off-policy safe reinforcement learning for nonlinear discrete-time systems,”
Neurocomputing, vol. 611, 128677, 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2024.128677.
16


[6] S. Liu, L. Liu, and Z. Yu, “Safe reinforcement learning for affine nonlinear systems with state constraints
and input saturation using control barrier functions,” Neurocomputing, vol. 518, pp. 562–576, 2023, doi:
10.1016/j.neucom.2022.11.006.
[7] Z. Hou, W. Liu, and A. Knoll, “Safe reinforcement learning for autonomous driving by using disturbance-
observer-based control barrier functions,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 3782–
3791, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TIV.2024.3463468.
[8] F. Zhang and G.-H. Yang, “Safe reinforcement learning for constrained optimal control with provable guar-
antees: Applications to motion planning,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 26,
no. 10, pp. 14780–14791, 2025, doi: 10.1109/TITS.2025.3583083.
[9] S. Adam, L. Busoniu, and R. Babuska, “Experience replay for real-time reinforcement learning control,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 201–212, 2012, doi:
10.1109/TSMCC.2011.2106494.
[10] R. Khalili-Amirabadi,
M. Jalaeian-Farimani,
and O. Solaymani-Fard,
“Experience replay in re-
inforcement learning:
A systematic review,”
Neurocomputing,
vol. 700,
p. 134403,
2026,
doi:
10.1016/j.neucom.2026.134403.
[11] V. Mnih et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp.
529–533, 2015, doi: 10.1038/nature14236.
[12] T. Schaul, J. Quan, I. Antonoglou, and D. Silver, “Prioritized experience replay,” arXiv:1511.05952, 2015.
[13] Z. Gao, R. Tang, L. Chen, Q. Huang, and J. He, “Continuous shared control in prosthetic hand grasp tasks
by deep deterministic policy gradient with hindsight experience replay,” International Journal of Advanced
Robotic Systems, vol. 17, no. 4, 2020, doi: 10.1177/1729881420936851.
[14] T. Bian and Z.-P. Jiang, “Reinforcement learning and adaptive optimal control for continuous-time nonlinear
systems: A value iteration approach,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 33,
no. 7, pp. 2781–2790, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TNNLS.2020.3045087.
[15] D. Wang, “Intelligent critic control with robustness guarantee of disturbed nonlinear plants,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Cybernetics, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 2740–2748, 2020, doi: 10.1109/TCYB.2019.2903117.
[16] Q. Chen, Y. Jin, and Y. Song, “Fault-tolerant adaptive tracking control of Euler–Lagrange systems: An echo-
state-network approach driven by reinforcement learning,” Neurocomputing, vol. 484, pp. 109–116, 2022,
doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2021.10.083.
[17] D. Wang, Z. Zhou, M. Li, J. Ren, and J. Qiao, “Event-based robust performance guarantee for nonaffine
plants via system identification,” International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, vol. 33, no. 10, pp.
5365–5387, 2023, doi: 10.1002/rnc.6646.
[18] A. Liu, D. Wang, Y. He, K. Ye, and J. Qiao, “Value-iteration-based robust adaptive critic for disturbed non-
affine continuous-time systems,” International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control, vol. 35, no. 10, pp.
4407–4415, 2025, doi: 10.1002/rnc.7914.
[19] A. Elkenawy, A. M. El-Nagar, M. El-Bardini, and N. M. El-Rabaie, “Diagonal recurrent neural network
observer-based adaptive control for unknown nonlinear systems,” Transactions of the Institute of Measure-
ment and Control, vol. 42, no. 15, pp. 2833–2856, 2020, doi: 10.1177/0142331220921259.
[20] R. Khalili-Amirabadi, O. S. Fard, and M. Jalaeian-Farimani, “Towards optimal control of HPV model using
safe reinforcement learning with actor-critic neural networks,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 264,
125783, 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.eswa.2024.125783.
[21] R. Khalili-Amirabadi, M. Jalaeian-Farimani, and O. S. Fard, “LSTM-empowered reinforcement learning in
bi-level optimal control for nonlinear systems with uncertain dynamics,” ISA Transactions, vol. 168, pp.
465–478, 2026, doi: 10.1016/j.isatra.2025.11.027.
[22] R. Khalili-Amirabadi, M. Jalaeian-Farimani, and O. S. Fard, “Self-organizing dual-buffer adaptive clustering
experience replay (SODACER) for safe reinforcement learning in optimal control,” Scientific Reports, vol.
16, 14960, 2026, doi: 10.1038/s41598-026-44517-1.
17


[23] H. Hailemichael, B. Ayalew, and A. Ivanco, “Optimal control barrier functions for RL based safe powertrain
control,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 56, pp. 385–390, 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2023.12.054.
[24] P. Adjei, N. Tasfi, S. Gomez-Rosero, and M. A. M. Capretz, “Safe reinforcement learning for arm
manipulation with constrained Markov decision process,” Robotics, vol. 13, no. 4, 63, 2024, doi:
10.3390/robotics13040063.
[25] X. Hickman,
Y. Lu,
and D. Prince,
“Hybrid safe reinforcement learning:
Tackling distribu-
tion shift and outliers with the Student-t process,” Neurocomputing, vol. 634, 129912, 2025, doi:
10.1016/j.neucom.2025.129912.
[26] X. Tian, H. Zhou, H. Zhang, L. Zhang, and L. Shi, “LSTM and attention-based meta-reinforcement learning
for trajectory tracking of underwater gliders with varying buoyancy loss and current disturbance,” Ocean
Engineering, vol. 326, 120906, 2025, doi: 10.1016/j.oceaneng.2025.120906.
[27] L. Song, L. Ferderer, and S. Wu, “Safe reinforcement learning for LiDAR-based navigation via control barrier
function,” in Proceedings of the 21st IEEE International Conference on Machine Learning and Applications,
2022, pp. 264–269, doi: 10.1109/ICMLA55696.2022.00045.
[28] I. Ganie and S. Jagannathan, “Optimal control in human-robotic agent teams for cooperative manipu-
lation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2025, pp. 3308–3313, doi:
10.1109/CDC57313.2025.11312132.
[29] Y. Hu, J. Chen, and C. Qin, “Event-triggered prescribed performance control of the multiplayer game non-
linear system via integral reinforcement learning,” Applied Mathematics and Computation, vol. 511, 129716,
2026, doi: 10.1016/j.amc.2025.129716.
[30] C. Qin, Z. Wang, S. Hou, M. Pang, G. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, and X. Wang, “Mixed zero-sum
game based dynamic event-triggered optimal control of multi-input nonlinear system with safety con-
straints,” Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation, vol. 152, 109376, 2026, doi:
10.1016/j.cnsns.2025.109376.
[31] C. Qin, K. Sun, A. Sun, D. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Wang, and Q. Qiu, “Dynamic event-triggered
optimal safety control of interconnected nonlinear systems with discontinuous state constraints by adaptive
dynamic programming,” Neurocomputing, vol. 669, 132467, 2026, doi: 10.1016/j.neucom.2025.132467.
[32] C. Qin, M. Pang, Z. Wang, S. Hou, and Q. Qiu, “ADP-based dynamic event-triggered fault-tolerant con-
trol for nonlinear systems with actuator failures and full-state time-varying constraints,” Communications in
Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation, vol. 157, 109676, 2026, doi: 10.1016/j.cnsns.2026.109676.
18


Supplementary Material
Toward Integrating Adaptive Experience Replay and Online Uncertainty Estimation in Safe
Actor-Critic Optimal Control
Mahshad Rastegarmoghaddam, Davoud Nikkhouy, Shima Samadzadeh
8. Purpose and reproducibility scope
This supplement reports the detailed protocol, moderate and exploratory extreme-stress seed-level results,
finite-buffer replay audit, fairness tests, information-leakage tests, statistical comparisons, and additional figures
supporting the manuscript. All numerical values are generated by the bundled code with 10 training episodes and
five seeds. The two uncertain physical obstacles remain static; all six methods receive the same raw noisy detector,
exploration, and disturbance streams for a fixed seed and episode. True obstacle centers and true clearance are re-
served for simulation evaluation and are excluded from actor, critic, estimator, control-barrier-function (CBF), and
replay updates. Multiplier 6.0 was added after an earlier 4.0 run and is reported descriptively, not as a preregistered
confirmatory test.
9. Experimental protocol
Table S1: Common protocol and implementation settings.
Setting
Value
Workspace
3.20m × 3.20m cluttered map with exact rectangular obstacles and two hidden-center
circular obstacles.
Robot
Radius 0.062m; planar velocity limit 0.72m/s; integration step 0.055s.
Start and goal
(0.22,2.82)m and (1.62,1.58)m.
Uncertain obstacles
Fixed centers (0.82,1.60)m and (1.82,0.92)m; radii 0.070m and 0.100m.
Training
10 episodes, 115 steps/episode, five seeds; common perception curriculum 1.0+0.06e.
Evaluation
280 transitions ending at 15.400s; last pre-transition sample at 15.345s; no actor/critic
updates.
Goal success
Trajectory enters the 5.5 cm goal tolerance at least once.
Tests
Nominal diagnostic 1.0; moderate post-training evaluation 2.2; exploratory sweep 0.8–
4.5; additional extreme rerun 6.0; disturbance multiplier 1.0.
Sweep
0.8,1.0,1.3,1.6,2.0,2.2,2.6,3.0,3.5,4.0,4.5.
Replay
Capacity 360, batch size 44, eight replay updates per training episode.
AER/Full weights
(λTD,λsafe,λunc,λnov) = (0.18,0.39,0.30,0.13).
The simulator advances the executed closed-loop transition and evaluates the common objective as
pt+1 = clipΩ[pt +0.055(ut +dt)],
∥ut∥2 ≤0.72,
(S1)
ℓt = 0.036∥pt −g∥2
2 +0.020∥ut∥2
2 +0.012∥ut −ua,t∥2
2 +0.036∥ut −ua,t∥2
+5.2Icontact,t +max(0,0.010−hknown
t
)2.
(S2)
Here dt is the common exogenous velocity disturbance, Ωis the robot-center workspace, and the contact bit is an
observable bumper event. The hidden true geometry is used to generate physical contact and evaluation metrics,
but continuous true clearance, true obstacle centers, true center error, and true gradients are excluded from the
replay record and all controller updates.
19


Table S2: Exact controller-visible replay schema. The compact generic tuple in the main manuscript is an interface; this table
records the implementation-specific fields required to reproduce the replayed critic, actor, estimator, replacement, and sampling
updates.
Group
Stored fields or meaning
Executed transition
pt, pt+1; nominal ua,t; executed ut; realized instantaneous cost; TD residual and bounded TD
score.
Replayed actor state
Common Gaussian exploration vector εt = (εx,t,εy,t) and active waypoint index kt. These are
required by the replayed waypoint update. No behavior-policy likelihood or importance ratio
is stored.
Safety interface
Estimated barrier slack and active perceived constraint; estimated-barrier gradient; CBF acti-
vation; correction ∥ut −ua,t∥; observable contact bit; safety score; boundary-event bit.
Uncertainty interface
For each obstacle: raw center zi,t, causal belief ˆci,t, posterior scale, detector-reported scale,
innovation norm, estimator outlier bit, measurement-validity/hold bit, observable jump score,
and known obstacle radius.
Replay management
Uncertainty score, state-cell novelty score, uncertainty-event bit, priority, method/configuration
identifier, seed, episode, step, time, training flag, severity values, and common sensor-stream
hash.
Explicitly excluded
True obstacle centers, continuous true clearance, true active constraint and gradient, hidden
detector-event label, raw/belief error against truth, and evaluator-only collision-source diag-
nostics. Evaluation output may contain these fields, but the replay sanitation function cannot
copy them.
9.1. Complete hyperparameters and selection provenance
No validation-set grid search, random search, Bayesian optimization, or method-specific parameter search was
performed. The values below are one common hand-fixed engineering configuration used for the six exploratory
ablations; they are not called tuned optima. This removes differential parameter budgets but does not establish that
each method is individually optimal. The additional multiplier-6.0 condition was introduced after an earlier 4.0
run. The local replay-weight perturbation in Table S4 is post hoc and descriptive and was not used to choose or
revise the reported weights.
Table S3. Complete code-grounded implementation constants. Distances are meters and velocities are meters per
second unless stated otherwise.
Module
Parameter
Fixed value or rule
Plant
Integration and clipping
Eq. (S1); ∆t = 0.055; ∥u∥≤0.72; post-step position
clipped to [rR,3.20−rR]2, rR = 0.062.
Plant
Horizons and goal
115 training transitions; 280 evaluation transitions;
goal tolerance 0.055; success if any of p0,..., p280
enters the tolerance.
Objective
Per-transition cost
Eq. (S2); common to all six rows.
Training
Budget
10 episodes, 8 replay batches per episode, batch size
44, seeds 0,...,4; training perception 1+0.06e.
Random streams
Integer seed rules
actor 12345+s; sensor 17000003+100003s+1009e;
disturbance 19001007+200003s+1013e; exploration
81021+1000s+53e; replay 202401+101s.
Actor
Initial waypoints
(0.22,2.82), (0.31,2.43), (0.62,2.25), (0.87,1.99),
(0.90,1.62), (1.04,1.27), (1.06,0.82), (1.44,0.70),
(2.18,0.70), (2.34,1.14), (1.82,1.39), (1.62,1.58).
Actor
Initialization/exploration
Internal-waypoint jitter standard deviation 0.006;
Gaussian training exploration standard deviation 0.017
per velocity component; no exploration in evaluation.
Actor
Nominal tracking
waypoint attraction gain 2.25; terminal-goal gain 0.28;
waypoint switches when current distance < 0.118 or
next distance plus 0.030 is below current distance.
Actor
Replayed policy term
actor learning rate 0.0040; TD-policy gain 0.18;
cost-TD residual clipped to [−2.2,2.2]; normalized
exploration clipped componentwise to [−2.5,2.5].
Actor
Auxiliary shaping/smoothing
safety, uncertainty, contact pressure weights
(0.58,0.27,0.15); waypoint smoothing weights
(current, previous, next) (0.74,0.13,0.13).
Continued on next page
20


Table S3 (continued)
Module
Parameter
Fixed value or rule
Actor
Waypoint corridor bounds
For internal indices 1:10: [.24,.38]×[2.31,2.46],
[.53,.77]×[2.10,2.36], [.77,1.07]×[1.84,2.14],
[.84,1.13]×[1.52,1.86], [.88,1.11]×[1.16,1.47],
[.97,1.11]×[.73,.89], [1.29,1.60]×[.65,.77],
[2.02,2.31]×[.65,.78], [2.16,2.43]×[1.00,1.26],
[1.70,1.94]×[1.33,1.55].
Critic
Features
Seven state-value features
[1,gx,gy,g2x,g2y, px/3.2, py/3.2], where g = pgoal −p.
Critic
Bellman update
discount γ = 0.985; learning rate 0.016; TD clip
[−2.2,2.2]; normalized increment denominator
1+∥φ∥2
2.
Known potential field
Rectangles/walls
rectangles: robot-radius inflation plus 0.022, influence
0.18, gain 0.42; walls: robot-radius margin plus 0.025,
influence 0.14, gain 0.34.
Perceived potential
field
Circular obstacles
inflation ri +rR +0.010+0.35σi; influence 0.31; gain
0.31.
Estimator
Initialization/reset
learned nominal scale 0.018; learned gate 0.050; reset
scale floor 0.014; default causal innovation gate 0.060.
Estimator
Online gain
base gain 0.24 for UE and 0.18 for Full; robust weight
min(1,gate/∥ν∥); gain-denominator floor 0.035; zero
gain on invalid measurements.
Estimator
Outlier/variance
jump threshold 0.60 for non-UE observable flags and
0.72 for UE; variance EMA 0.93/0.07; posterior
σ = clip(0.008+1.35√v+a,0.014,0.075) with
outlier addition a = 0.012 for UE and 0.008 for Full.
Estimator
Full anchor pull
episode reset blend (anchor, first raw) (0.78,0.22);
online anchor pull 0.018+0.10Ioutlier.
Estimator
Replay calibration
minimum 8 samples; geometric median (50 iterations
maximum, tolerance 10−8); lower-distance quantile
0.60; nominal multiplier 1.45 clipped to [0.009,0.030];
gate multiplier 2.7 clipped to [0.030,0.058]; anchor
EMA 0.86/0.14; nominal-scale/gate EMA 0.88/0.12.
CBF
Belief geometry
known inflation rR +0.018; uncertain robust inflation
ρ = 0.009+1.20σ; candidate ranges 0.30 known, 0.40
uncertain, and 0.26 walls.
CBF
Half-space rule
active when h < 0.20; class-K gain 2.9; right-side
allowance 0.012+0.18ρ at physical-disturbance
multiplier 1.0. The Gaussian disturbance is not hard
bounded.
CBF
Projection/guard passes
4 outer cycles; per cycle 1 all-barrier pass, 2
known-barrier passes, speed clip, then 2 known passes;
guard margin 0.0015+0.055(0.012) with at most 10
iterations; final 3 known-barrier passes.
Replay
Capacity/update
capacity 360; batch 44 without replacement; 8 batches
after every training episode; priority floor 10−5.
Replay
Scores/events
score formulas are the main manuscript’s TD, safety,
uncertainty, and novelty score equations; novelty grid
0.18; boundary if ˜h < 0.115, CBF active, correction
> 0.020, or contact; uncertainty event if score > 0.48
or estimator outlier.
Replay
Priority/sampling
AER/Full weights (0.18,0.39,0.30,0.13) and exponent
β = 0.78; PER uses TD-only priority and β = 0.68;
uniform rows use equal-probability sampling.
Replay
Replacement
uniform rows use reservoir replacement; prioritized
rows choose a random replacement candidate with
probability 0.16, otherwise the current
minimum-priority entry, and accept if the new priority
is no smaller or with fallback probability 0.035.
Continued on next page
21


Table S3 (continued)
Module
Parameter
Fixed value or rule
Replay
Priority refresh
After each critic update, TD scores/priorities are
refreshed for the sampled entries only; the whole buffer
is not rescored.
Sensor
Bias/noise/drift
registration magnitude U(0.010,0.019)× severity;
colored AR coefficient 0.82 with innovation standard
deviation 0.0032√severity; white jitter
0.0026√severity; sinusoidal amplitudes
(0.009,0.008)× severity.
Sensor
Jumps/holds
jump magnitude U(0.050,0.070)× severity, direction
noise 0.22 rad, decay factor 0.955, nominal 16–22
affected samples; hold-onset probability
min(0.012severity,0.055) and duration 2–4 samples;
reported scale 0.010.
Disturbance
Shared process
AR coefficient 0.90, Gaussian innovation standard
deviation 0.0018 at multiplier 1.0, sinusoidal
amplitudes (0.0040,0.0035); stochastic process is not
hard bounded.
9.2. Post-hoc local replay-weight sensitivity
A post-hoc local sensitivity diagnostic changes one nominal AER/Full weight by −20% or +20%, renor-
malizes the four weights to sum to one, retrains Full with the unchanged five seeds and ten-episode curriculum,
and evaluates episode identifier 1001 at multipliers 2.2 and 6.0. The nominal rerun reproduces the reported
Full seed metrics to within 1.8 × 10−15.
This analysis was performed after the reported configuration was
fixed and was not used for selection. Across all nine configurations, both tiers remain contact-free and reach
the goal in all five seeds.
The complete 90 seed rows and unrounded 18 aggregate rows are exported in
posthoc_aer_weight_sensitivity_seed_metrics.csv and posthoc_aer_weight_sensitivity_aggregate.csv.
Table S4: Descriptive one-at-a-time replay-weight sensitivity for Full. Each changed component is multiplied by 0.8 or 1.2 and
all four weights are then renormalized. Values are mean ± sample standard deviation over five seeds; C is cost, H is minimum
global clearance (cm), and R is belief RMSE (cm). All rows have zero contacts and five successful seeds at both tiers.
Configuration
(λTD,λsafe,λunc,λnov)
C2.2
H2.2
R2.2
C6.0
H6.0
R6.0
Nominal
(.180,.390,.300,.130)
6.94±.30
3.73±.36
3.44±.22
7.63±.44
2.71±.23
3.52±.55
TD −20%
(.149,.405,.311,.135)
6.97±.29
3.76±.37
3.44±.21
7.65±.44
2.70±.21
3.54±.70
TD +20%
(.208,.376,.290,.125)
6.99±.27
3.77±.34
3.44±.20
7.66±.44
2.68±.19
3.50±.62
Safety −20%
(.195,.338,.325,.141)
6.96±.24
3.77±.37
3.46±.20
7.65±.35
2.68±.21
3.58±.67
Safety +20%
(.167,.434,.278,.121)
6.98±.29
3.74±.40
3.43±.22
7.64±.42
2.70±.22
3.49±.65
Uncertainty −20%
(.191,.415,.255,.138)
6.99±.28
3.78±.36
3.45±.21
7.66±.43
2.71±.22
3.55±.69
Uncertainty +20%
(.170,.368,.340,.123)
6.96±.29
3.78±.35
3.46±.19
7.64±.43
2.72±.22
3.58±.70
Novelty −20%
(.185,.400,.308,.107)
6.98±.22
3.76±.39
3.43±.22
7.67±.39
2.69±.22
3.53±.68
Novelty +20%
(.175,.380,.292,.152)
6.96±.25
3.76±.33
3.42±.21
7.64±.39
2.71±.22
3.47±.57
The largest absolute shift from the nominal mean is 0.0490 in moderate cost, 0.0551 cm in moderate global
clearance, 0.0198 cm in moderate belief RMSE, 0.0421 in extreme cost, 0.0277 cm in extreme global clearance,
and 0.0616 cm in extreme belief RMSE. This local stability is evidence only for the tested ±20% neighborhood;
it is not a global sensitivity surface, an optimality result, or an independent validation study.
At multiplier 6.0, the shared detector has persistent registration-bias amplitude 6.0–11.4 cm, smooth drift up
to 5.4 cm in x and 4.8 cm in y, and temporary center jumps of 30–42 cm. Each injected jump has a nominal
16–22-sample (0.88–1.21 s) decay and scheduled injections can overlap. While no hold is active, the hold-onset
probability is 5.5% per step and each onset repeats the prior measurement for two to four frames. The detector
nevertheless reports a standard deviation of only 1 cm, representing a deliberately overconfident sensor under
distribution shift. The CBF’s 0.012m/s disturbance term is a design allowance; the common Gaussian AR(1)-
plus-sinusoid disturbance is not hard bounded.
Comparison-method provenance.. Reference numbers follow the main-manuscript comparison table.
AC is
the uniform-replay reference configuration [1,2]; AC+CBF is linked to the CBF-safe-control literature [3,4];
AC+CBF+PER adds temporal-difference-prioritized replay [11]; AC+CBF+UE adds online uncertainty estima-
tion [33,20]; AC+CBF+AER adds adaptive safety-aware replay [21]; and Full combines CBF, online uncertainty
estimation, and adaptive replay. These labels identify component provenance, not exact reproductions of the cited
22


algorithms. Every numerical value in the following tables was generated by executing the six local configurations
on the common benchmark with shared streams and seeds; no numerical result was copied from a cited publication.
Actor-update scope.. The linear state-value critic is fitted from realized cost and next state produced by the ex-
ecuted post-filter action. Its clipped cost-TD residual directly enters a replay-weighted score-function waypoint
update, together with auxiliary controller-visible barrier shaping. Replayed samples contain neither behavior-
policy likelihoods nor importance ratios; consequently, this is a biased off-policy surrogate rather than an unbiased
on-policy policy-gradient estimator. The benchmark establishes a direct critic-to-actor code path but does not
isolate or claim a performance gain caused by the learned value baseline alone.
10. Moderate post-training results
Table S5: Moderate perception-stress results at multiplier 2.2 (mean ± standard deviation over five seeds). Main-manuscript
reference numbers beside methods identify motivating strands; all values were generated on the common benchmark. For CBF
intervention, ↓means lower intervention workload, not greater safety.
Method
Cost ↓
Viol. ↓
Min. global h ↑
Uncertain clearance ↑
Belief RMSE ↓
Goal error ↓
Goal success ↑
CBF int. ↓
Runtime ↓
(%)
(cm)
(cm)
(cm)
(cm)
(%)
(%)
(ms/280-transition episode)
AC[1,2]
11.62±7.35
0.36±0.51
0.03±0.36
0.03±0.36
6.01±0.53
4.67±0.81
100.0±0.0
N/A
139.61±10.51
AC+CBF[3,4]
6.89±0.17
0.00±0.00
1.00±0.69
1.00±0.69
6.01±0.53
4.44±0.60
100.0±0.0
18.29±2.06
229.70±12.19
AC+CBF+PER[11]
6.68±0.20
0.00±0.00
1.41±1.00
1.41±1.00
6.01±0.53
4.43±0.61
100.0±0.0
19.07±1.93
221.31±12.57
AC+CBF+UE[33,20]
7.36±0.32
0.00±0.00
3.23±1.13
3.83±1.85
5.09±0.58
4.52±0.66
100.0±0.0
27.29±4.57
224.80±17.99
AC+CBF+AER[21]
6.72±0.15
0.00±0.00
1.97±0.88
1.97±0.88
6.01±0.53
4.39±0.69
100.0±0.0
18.21±1.79
215.69±15.70
Full (present)
6.94±0.30
0.00±0.00
3.73±0.36
4.55±1.26
3.44±0.22
4.40±0.75
100.0±0.0
21.50±3.27
229.91±10.60
11. Additional exploratory extreme-stress results
Table S6: Additional exploratory extreme-stress results at multiplier 6.0 (mean ± sample standard deviation over five seeds).
Main-manuscript reference numbers beside methods identify motivating strands; all values were generated on the common
benchmark. For CBF intervention, ↓means lower intervention workload, not greater safety.
Method
Cost ↓
Viol. ↓
Min. global h ↑
Uncertain clearance ↑
Belief RMSE ↓
Goal error ↓
Goal success ↑
CBF int. ↓
Runtime ↓
(%)
(cm)
(cm)
(cm)
(cm)
(%)
(%)
(ms/280-transition episode)
AC[1,2]
46.99±19.28
2.79±1.32
−1.76±0.80
−1.76±0.80
16.71±1.55
4.00±0.69
100.0±0.0
N/A
142.03±13.87
AC+CBF[3,4]
31.00±12.43
1.64±0.86
−1.26±0.40
−1.26±0.40
16.71±1.55
4.62±0.69
100.0±0.0
19.79±4.38
223.44±10.32
AC+CBF+PER[11]
39.08±24.08
2.21±1.64
−1.04±1.91
−1.04±1.91
16.71±1.55
4.47±0.76
100.0±0.0
18.36±2.38
220.59±15.82
AC+CBF+UE[33,20]
8.96±2.08
0.00±0.00
3.22±2.81
3.94±3.37
11.08±1.23
17.72±29.14
80.0±44.7
47.64±28.19
236.34±17.71
AC+CBF+AER[21]
22.62±12.82
1.07±0.87
−0.35±1.55
−0.35±1.55
16.71±1.55
4.37±0.67
100.0±0.0
21.64±3.66
217.80±12.77
Full (present)
7.63±0.44
0.00±0.00
2.71±0.23
6.95±0.26
3.52±0.55
4.70±0.51
100.0±0.0
29.14±4.69
228.76±15.32
11.1. Seed-level exploratory extreme-stress outcomes
Table S7: Seed-level outcomes in the additional multiplier-6.0 rerun.
Method
Seed
Cost
Viol. count
Min. h (cm)
Belief RMSE (cm)
Goal error (cm)
Reached
AC
0
42.80
7
-1.12
17.03
3.30
yes
AC
1
63.49
11
-2.65
17.14
4.61
yes
AC
2
16.80
2
-0.80
17.87
3.42
yes
AC
3
63.86
11
-2.43
14.00
3.86
yes
AC
4
48.01
8
-1.79
17.50
4.81
yes
AC+CBF
0
27.98
4
-1.14
17.03
5.20
yes
AC+CBF
1
48.60
8
-1.81
17.14
4.21
yes
AC+CBF
2
17.24
2
-0.73
17.87
3.84
yes
AC+CBF
3
23.19
3
-1.44
14.00
4.39
yes
AC+CBF
4
37.99
6
-1.18
17.50
5.49
yes
AC+CBF+PER
0
38.21
6
-1.29
17.03
4.87
yes
AC+CBF+PER
1
74.49
13
-2.81
17.14
4.21
yes
AC+CBF+PER
2
6.49
0
2.16
17.87
3.42
yes
AC+CBF+PER
3
38.59
6
-2.09
14.00
4.37
yes
AC+CBF+PER
4
37.64
6
-1.19
17.50
5.47
yes
AC+CBF+UE
0
7.44
0
0.66
12.17
5.06
yes
AC+CBF+UE
1
11.13
0
7.83
12.60
69.83
no
AC+CBF+UE
2
7.30
0
3.05
10.30
3.61
yes
AC+CBF+UE
3
11.34
0
3.23
9.82
5.15
yes
AC+CBF+UE
4
7.60
0
1.31
10.51
4.96
yes
AC+CBF+AER
0
27.82
4
-1.16
17.03
5.09
yes
AC+CBF+AER
1
38.54
6
-1.65
17.14
4.25
yes
AC+CBF+AER
2
6.71
0
2.26
17.87
3.37
yes
AC+CBF+AER
3
12.59
1
-0.17
14.00
4.26
yes
AC+CBF+AER
4
27.43
4
-1.02
17.50
4.88
yes
Full
0
7.55
0
2.64
3.07
5.32
yes
Full
1
7.48
0
2.90
3.92
4.44
yes
23


Method
Seed
Cost
Viol. count
Min. h (cm)
Belief RMSE (cm)
Goal error (cm)
Reached
Full
2
7.21
0
2.94
3.89
3.99
yes
Full
3
8.38
0
2.37
2.77
4.74
yes
Full
4
7.53
0
2.68
3.94
4.98
yes
12. Statistical comparisons
The omnibus Friedman tests across the six paired methods give χ2
F = 17.00 (p = 0.00450) for cost, χ2
F = 21.23 (p = 7.32×10−4) for violation rate, χ2
F = 20.43
(p = 0.00104) for minimum clearance, and χ2
F = 25.00 (p = 1.39 × 10−4) for belief RMSE. Goal error is not significant (χ2
F = 10.37, p = 0.0654). For CBF
intervention among the five CBF methods, χ2
F = 18.40 and p = 0.00103. Because only five pairs are available, the two-sided Wilcoxon tests have coarse resolution
and are reported as exploratory paired comparisons alongside the seed-level outcomes; they do not establish statistical superiority. All p-values are unadjusted
across the reported metrics and pairs, and no multiplicity-adjusted confirmatory inference is made. Both test families and the SciPy version are exported by the
bundled software.
Table S8: Complete exported Friedman tests for the additional extreme-stress evaluation. The CBF-intervention row excludes
AC because intervention is not defined without a CBF. Values are unadjusted exploratory diagnostics.
Scope
Metric
Methods
χ2
F
p value
All six
Cost
6
17.0000
0.0044998
All six
Violation rate
6
21.2342
0.0007315
All six
Minimum global clearance
6
20.4286
0.0010382
All six
Belief-center RMSE
6
25.0000
0.0001393
All six
Goal error
6
10.3714
0.0653696
Five CBF rows
CBF intervention rate
5
18.4000
0.0010306
Table S9: Two-sided paired Wilcoxon comparisons against Full in the additional extreme-stress test. With five pairs and ties,
the results are exploratory; p-values are unadjusted.
Comparison
Metric
Statistic
p value
AC vs Full
cost / violation / min clearance / belief RMSE
0/0/0/0
0.0625/0.0625/0.0625/0.0625
AC+CBF vs Full
cost / violation / min clearance / belief RMSE
0/0/0/0
0.0625/0.0625/0.0625/0.0625
AC+CBF+PER vs Full
cost / violation / min clearance / belief RMSE
1/0/0/0
0.125/0.125/0.0625/0.0625
AC+CBF+UE vs Full
cost / violation / min clearance / belief RMSE
3/0/7/0
0.3125/1.000/1.000/0.0625
AC+CBF+AER vs Full
cost / violation / min clearance / belief RMSE
1/0/0/0
0.125/0.125/0.0625/0.0625
13. Finite-buffer replay audit
Table S10: Generated, retained, and sampled event fractions (mean ± standard deviation over five seeds). Main-manuscript
method-reference mapping is AC [1,2], AC+CBF [3,4], AC+CBF+PER [11], AC+CBF+UE [33,20], AC+CBF+AER [21], and
Full (present).
Method
Generated boundary
Stored boundary
Sampled boundary
Generated uncertainty
Stored uncertainty
Sampled uncertainty
AC
0.804±0.004
0.793±0.025
0.790±0.019
0.115±0.016
0.113±0.010
0.102±0.015
AC+CBF
0.805±0.004
0.788±0.027
0.802±0.016
0.115±0.016
0.113±0.010
0.102±0.015
AC+CBF+PER
0.813±0.004
0.868±0.009
0.818±0.009
0.115±0.016
0.079±0.021
0.073±0.015
AC+CBF+UE
0.815±0.002
0.803±0.029
0.813±0.013
0.128±0.016
0.127±0.018
0.108±0.020
AC+CBF+AER
0.807±0.005
0.985±0.002
0.950±0.005
0.115±0.016
0.170±0.030
0.143±0.026
Full
0.821±0.004
1.000±0.000
0.963±0.004
0.184±0.024
0.264±0.026
0.229±0.036
14. Fairness, no-oracle, and collision-source audits
• Shared sensor stream: for all 15 nominal/moderate/extreme seed-evaluation groups, six methods are present, there is exactly one within-run composite sensor-
stream hash covering raw centers, validity bits, jump scores, and reported scales, and the across-method ranges of raw sensor RMSE, hold fraction, and jump
mean are all zero. The hash certifies within-run equality; it is not claimed to be portable across arbitrary numerical-library platforms.
• Hidden-truth invariance: translating hidden true centers by (0.43,−0.31) m while keeping all controller-visible signals fixed gives maximum nominal- and
executed-action differences of zero for every method.
• Known-map collisions: the audit reports known-wall/rectangle violations separately from uncertain-obstacle contacts in the additional extreme test.
• Replay sanitation: true obstacle center, true signed clearance, true center error, and true gradients are absent from stored learning transitions.
24


15. Additional figures
(a) Violation ablation.
(b) Minimum uncertain-obstacle clearance.
Figure S1: Additional extreme-stress safety summaries. Bars show means and error bars show sample standard deviations over
five seeds; individual seed points are not overlaid.
(a) Cost.
(b) Belief RMSE.
Figure S2: Exploratory extreme-stress performance and estimation summaries; bars show mean ± sample standard deviation
over five seeds.
(a) Violation rate.
(b) Minimum true clearance.
Figure S3: Eleven-level perception-uncertainty sweep.
25


Figure S4: Obstacle-center belief error over time in the severe visualization episode.
Figure S5: Time-sequence panels illustrating fixed physical obstacles and changing detector/belief centers.
26
