Title: Robot Learning on Discrete Surfaces: Theory and Applications

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.01910v1

Published Time: Fri, 02 Oct 2026 02:21:04 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
> IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 1

# Robot Learning on Discrete Surfaces: Theory and Applications 

Matteo Dalle Vedove 1,2, Fares J. Abu-Dakka 3, Luigi Palopoli 4, Daniele Fontanelli 1, Matteo Saveriano 1

Abstract —All the objects composing our world are enclosed within surfaces. Yet, most robot learning and motion generation frameworks treat surfaces as constraints ignoring their intrinsic geometry. This gap is acute for polyhedral meshes—the standard output of CAD and 3D reconstruction—whose discrete geometric structure remains unexploited. In this paper, we propose a unified discrete Riemannian framework that enables robot learning directly on polyhedral surface meshes. Using discrete differ-ential geometry, we define logarithmic and exponential maps, parallel transport, and ambient-space projections that remain well-defined across faces, edges, and vertices. We instantiate the framework in three learning paradigms: ( i) Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs), an improved exponential-map computation and a fixed-tangent-cone forcing-term encoding with parallel transport yield better cross-surface generalisation and stability over prior mesh-based approaches. ( ii ) Gaussian Process (GP), a geodesic-based kernel with practical admissibility control, enables regression at arbitrary mesh locations without smoothness as-sumptions. ( iii ) Riemannian Flow Matching (RFM), mesh-native operators improve generative quality over spectral baselines while reducing training time. The framework is validated in simulation against state-of-the-art methods and demonstrated on two real-robot scenarios: generalising user-drawn trajectories across different surfaces and planning polishing motions on RGB-D-reconstructed surfaces. 

Index Terms —Learning from Demonstration, Learning on Discrete Manifolds 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# IN real applications, robots have to learn how to physically interact with objects and their environment. Sometimes this is required for manipulation purposes (e.g., grasping, pick-and-place, insertion), and sometimes for manufacturing operations (e.g., wiping, finishing, drawing, grinding, cutting, inspecting). A common trait of all these operations is that they are not executed in free space: in the vast majority of cases, they entail continuous contact with a surface enclosing the target object, where friction effects and geometric irregularities play a significant role. This raises a fundamental question: can a learning process for such tasks be truly effective if the geometric properties of the contact surface are ignored? This issue has been often overlooked in the literature. Most existing Learning from Demonstration (LfD) and motion generation 

Co-funded by the European Union projects INVERSE (grant agreement no. 101136067) and MAGICIAN (grant agreement no. 101120731) 

> 1

Department of Industrial Engineering, Universit` a di Trento, Trento, Italy. 

matteo.dallevedove@unitn.it 

> 2

DRIM, Ph.D. of national interest in Robotics and Intelligent Machines. 

> 3

Mechanical Engineering Program, Division of Engineering, New York University Abu Dhabi, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. 

> 4

Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, Universit` adi Trento, Trento, Italy. 

frameworks assume that skills evolve in flat Euclidean spaces and can be directly transferred to surfaces. When task com-plexity increases, surface constraints are typically recovered a posteriori through projection methods [1], impedance control, or local parameterisation. While effective in structured and repeatable settings, treating surface geometry as an external constraint—rather than an intrinsic component of the learning process—often results in poor generalisation when the under-lying structure changes. In recent years, geometry-aware learning methods have been proposed for some classes of Riemannian manifolds, such as rotations or symmetric positive-definite matrices [2]–[5], for which researchers have developed tools and methods to learn robot skills in non-Euclidean spaces. These formulations rely on differential operators—such as exponential and logarithmic maps, and parallel transport—that enable learning and con-trol directly in the tangent space. However, extending these methods to surface-based skills remains an open issue, as surfaces encountered in real applications are rarely available as smooth manifolds. In most cases, surfaces are obtained from CAD models, perception pipelines, or 3D reconstruction tools [6], for which the most natural representation is a 3D polyhedral mesh. Such discrete representations exhibit non-differentiable singularities at edges and vertices and do not admit the smooth structure assumed by classical Riemannian learning frameworks. The absence of a smooth representation creates a significant gap between geometry-aware robot learning theory and its practical applicability to discrete manifolds. Although surfaces can be studied through the lens of differential geometry, constructing smooth representations for objects with arbitrary topology is generally intractable [7]. At the same time, na¨ ıve discretisation of smooth manifold operators on meshes either requires restrictive assumptions on surface smoothness or leads to inconsistencies and ill-defined behaviour at singularities. As a result, existing approaches often rely on local approxima-tions, ad hoc embeddings, or spectral smoothness assumptions that limit robustness and hinder generalisation [8]–[10]. 

Paper Contribution. In this work, we take a more direct route to fill this gap by developing a discrete Riemannian framework for robot learning directly on polyhedral surface meshes. Starting from discrete differential geometry [11], we construct geometrically consistent approximations of key Riemannian operators—including logarithmic and exponential maps, parallel transport, geodesic distance, and ambient-space projections—that remain well-defined across faces, edges, and vertices of a mesh. Unlike prior mesh-based formulations [9], which leave edge and vertex singularities unaddressed and rely arXiv:2610.01910v1 [cs.RO] 1 Oct 2026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 2

on local approximations of the exponential map (valid only for small displacements), our operators are built on the straightest-geodesic principle [12] and are equipped with tangent-cone projections that handle all singular loci. Building on this geometric foundation, we show how three established learning frameworks can be naturally extended to discrete surfaces: (i) geometry-aware Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs) with a fixed-tangent-cone forcing-term encoding that replaces the local parameterisations used in [9], [13], ( ii ) geodesic-distance-based Gaussian Processes (GPs) with controllable kernel admissibility, and (iii ) Riemannian Flow Matching (RFM) with mesh-native operators replacing the spectral pre-metrics of [4]. These formulations yield motion and function representations that generalise across surfaces with different curvature, topology, and discretisation resolution, removing the need for smoothness or spectral assumptions. To summarize, our main contributions are as follows:  

> •

A discrete Riemannian operator framework on polyhedral meshes—including tangent cones, straightest-geodesic exponential maps, and ambient-space projections—that explicitly handles edge and vertex singularities left unad-dressed by existing mesh-based methods [8], [9], enabling consistent geometric computations directly on discrete surface representations like polyhedral meshes.  

> •

A reformulation of geometry-aware DMPs on meshes that encodes forcing term in a fixed tangent cone and reconstructs it via parallel transport during execution, re-placing the local, velocity-aligned parameterisation of [9] and eliminating the limit-cycle drift it induces on curved surfaces.  

> •

A geodesic-distance-based GP formulation on meshes that enables kernel regression at arbitrary surface locations—including face interiors—without smoothness or density requirements, overcoming the vertex-restriction and resolution-sensitivity of Laplace–Beltrami-based ker-nels [10].  

> •

An extension of RFM to discrete polyhedral surfaces us-ing geodesic premetrics, improving generative quality and reducing training time relative to the spectral baselines of [4]. The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section II analyses the state of the art. After a quick recall of foundation knowledge (Sec. III), we present the unified approach for geometry-aware learning on discrete surfaces in Sec. IV. Section V provides simulation results and comparisons with the state-of-the-art, while Sec. VI provides experiments on a real robot highlighting the strengths of our approach. We conclude in Sec. VII with some limitations of the approach and final remarks. II. R ELATED WORK 

Geometric Learning: Learning from Demonstration (LfD) is a widely adopted paradigm for encoding human expertise and transferring it into robotic systems [14]. Clas-sical LfD approaches—including DMPs [15], Probabilistic MPs [16], Kernelised MPs [17], or Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) [18]—have been successfully applied to learn skills defined in Euclidean spaces. However, these methods do not account for the intrinsic geometry of constrained domains, and consequently fail when applied to data evolving on non-linear spaces such as rotations, stiffness matrices, or surfaces. To address this limitation, Lie-group-based formulations and Riemannian geometry have been introduced, with Lie-algebra approaches proving effective for specific spaces [19]–[22], and Riemannian formulations offering greater flexibility by imposing fewer structural restrictions on the domain [2]–[4], [23], [24]. As a result, geometry-aware learning methods on smooth manifolds have been successfully applied to rotations, symmetric positive-definite matrices, and Grassmannian man-ifolds, where closed-form expressions of geometric operators are available. However, extending these results to surfaces remains largely an open problem, as real-world surface repre-sentations lack the fundamental structure that these methods rely on. 

Learning on smooth and discrete manifolds: Several methods have been proposed to parameterise smooth surfaces using spline or subdivision representations [25]–[27]. While effective in computer graphics and geometric modelling, these approaches typically provide only local parameterisations or impose strong constraints on surface topology, restricting their applicability to robotic learning tasks involving complex or reconstructed environments. Working directly on polyhedral surface meshes has emerged as a promising alternative. Pantic et al. [8] proposed a mesh-manifold-based motion planning algorithm, framed as a Riemannian motion policy [24], that uses isomorphic mappings to flatten meshes onto planar do-mains. However, this strategy requires restrictive topological assumptions and implicitly assumes sufficient mesh smooth-ness, avoiding the singularities arising at edges and vertices rather than addressing them. The MeshDMP framework [9] represents the most direct prior reference for our approach, as it extends geometry-aware DMPs [23] to discrete surfaces. While MeshDMP removes topological restrictions on the mesh, it suffers from two important limitations. First, it relies on an approximate exponential map that is valid only under bounded face-angle conditions and does not explicitly address vertex singularities. Second, its forcing-term encoding is defined in a local, moving coordinate system, which can lead to instability and degraded generalisation, particularly for rhythmic motion patterns. Our approach addresses both limitations of MeshDMP and, more broadly, establishes a geometrically consistent foundation for learning on discrete surfaces. By adopting a straightest-geodesic-based [12] exponential map and explicitly handling edge and vertex singularities, we obtain a more principled and consistent geometric formulation. Additionally, by encoding the forcing term in a fixed tangent space and transporting it during execution, we achieve substantially improved stability and transferability across surfaces, without relying on local parameterisations. 

Meshes and the Laplace-Beltrami operator: The Laplace-Beltrami operator (LBO) is the generalisation of the Lapla-cian to smooth Riemannian manifolds. Despite being ini-tially developed for differentiable structures, its definition has been extended to discrete domains, including polyhedral IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 3

meshes [28], [29]. The LBO is a powerful tool for learning on surfaces, as its spectral decomposition can be used to approximate distances, kernels, and function spaces [30]–[32]. As an example, a pioneering work by Borovitskiy et al. [10] exploited the eigenfunction basis of the LBO to construct Mat´ ern kernels on compact manifolds, effectively enabling Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) on meshes. A key advantage of LBO-based methods is that they offer theoretical guarantees. However, they implicitly assume that the mesh is a sufficiently good approximation of a smooth surface and restrict function evaluation to mesh vertices. As a consequence, accurate GPR often requires dense meshes or additional interpolation steps, increasing computational cost and approximation error. Our approach, instead, relies directly on geodesic distance computation, enabling GPR at arbitrary surface locations—including points in the interior of faces— without any smoothness requirement. It is worth mentioning that geodesic-based kernels may lose positive definiteness beyond a critical lengthscale [33]. We address this limitation by treating it as a practical modelling trade-off and introduce criteria that ensure stable GPR in realistic scenarios. 

Riemannian generative models: Continuous Normalising Flows (CNFs) [34] are generative models that represent proba-bility distributions by learning smooth, time-dependent vector fields whose integration defines a continuous transformation from a simple base distribution to a target data distribution. Despite their theoretical appeal and exact likelihood formula-tion, CNF-based architectures are computationally expensive to train, particularly in high-dimensional settings, and can suffer from numerical instability. Conditional Flow Matching (CFM) [35], [36] addresses these limitations by replacing likelihood maximisation with a regression-based objective, substantially improving both training stability and efficiency. Particularly relevant for geometric learning is the work by Chen et al. [4], who extend CFM to Riemannian manifolds (RFM) by explicitly incorporating the geometric structure into the flow definition. By defining probability paths on manifolds, their approach trains a neural network to learn vector fields using exact differential operators on analytically defined manifolds (e.g., hyperspheres and tori), or approximate operators for discrete domains such as meshes, constructed via premetrics induced by the Laplace–Beltrami operator. Our framework extends RFM to polyhedral meshes by introducing geometrically consistent operators tailored to mesh representations, enabling more stable and accurate vector field learning. As demonstrated in the evaluation below, the perfor-mance improvement is consistent across the tested baseline methods. III. B ACKGROUND 

In this section, we present some background notions needed for a proper understanding of our approach. The notation used throughout the paper is reported in Table I. 

A. Riemannian Manifolds 

A Riemannian n-manifold is a pair (M, g), where M is a differentiable manifold and g : T(·)M × T(·)M → R is a                                                                                                      

> TABLE I NOTATION
> Msmooth manifold
> Mpolyhedral mesh
> Mmanifold (discrete or smooth)
> gmetric on MT(·)Mtangent space on Mat (·)
> T(·)Mtangent cone on Mat (·)
> T M tangent bundle, set {(p, v )|p∈M, v ∈TpM}GP Gaussian Process
> γ⊂Mgeodesic curve
> ℓ∈R+geodesic length
> Log (·)logarithmic map; M7→T(·)M
> Exp (·)exponential map; T(·)M7→MP(·)→(◦)parallel transport; T(·)M7→T(◦)M
> ∇(·)covariant derivative; T(·)M×T(·)M7→T(·)Mp, q points in Mv, w, z tangent vectors in T(·)Mnnormal vector field on M
> gDMP goal/centre in M
> fDMP forcing term
> xDMP phase variable
> τ, Ω, α, β, ζ DMP coefficients in R+
> hrandom function drawn from a GP
> kkernel function; mapping M×M→R+
> P={pi}mi=1 collection of mpoints on Myobserved sample from hwith noise N(0 , σ 2)
> KXY covariance function k(X, Y )
> κkernel length scale
> πprobability density function on Mπref , π data reference, data probability density functions
> Pspace of probability densities
> ϕtflow of a vecto field ut
> Θparameters of the RFM vector field
> ηRFM scheduler
> DRFM premetric; mapping M×M7→R+

smoothly varying inner product defined on each tangent space 

T(·)M [37]. Based on the definition of the metric g, one can construct other meaningful concepts, such as distances, angles, volumes, and curvature. The choice of g plays a critical role and it is application dependent. In this work, we consider the metric to be the one induced by the ambient space of the manifold, i.e., 

g : ⟨v, w ⟩ ≜ v⊤w v, w ∈ Ty M ⊂ R2n, (1) where we define the inner product using the dot product in Euclidean (ambient) space. This is always possible since any smooth n-manifold admits a smooth embedding into R2n [38], which implies that, for any point p ∈ M, the tangent plane 

TpM is a n-dimensional linear subspace of R2n.Differential geometry is built around the notion that amanifold M locally resembles its tangent space T(·)M, which provides a Euclidean approximation at each point. For this reason, specific operators are required to map values from manifolds to tangent spaces, and vice versa. Let p ∈ M be a point of interest on the manifold. The logarithmic map 

Log p : M → TpM is the differential operator which enables the expression of any other point on M in the tangent space 

TpM of p. The dual operation of mapping values from the tangent space back to the manifold is achieved through the exponential map Exp p : TpM → M. Finally, the parallel transport Pp→q : TpM → Tq M is the operator that moves IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 4      

> spherical ( θ < 2π)euclidean ( θ= 2 π)hyperbolic ( θ > 2π)Fig. 1. Examples of spherical, euclidean, and hyperbolic vertices of a polyhedral mesh.

vectors from the tangent space of p to the tangent space of another point q ∈ M, while preserving their geometric prop-erties (such as length and angle) along the curve connecting p

and q on M. We refer to [2] for the definition, as well as for a good visual and intuitive representation, of these operators for popular manifolds in robotics. 

B. Polyhedral Meshes 

A polyhedral mesh is a discrete representation of a sur-face formed by a finite collection of planar polygonal faces, typically triangles, joined along shared edges and vertices. This representation is widely used in Computer-Aided Design (CAD) and computer vision, and is supported by a wide range of data structures and algorithms available off-the-shelf in the form of libraries [39]. In this work, we focus on manifold surface meshes M,which can be viewed as piecewise-linear, two-dimensional manifold surfaces embedded in R3. In contrast to the smooth surfaces of differential geometry, polyhedral meshes are flat on each face and exhibit discontinuities in the normal field at edges and vertices, where tangent planes are not uniquely defined. For this reason, polyhedral meshes are commonly referred to as discrete surfaces .A mesh M is described as a graph whose nodes are the vertices νi ∈ V , connected by edges, and whose faces Ti ∈ F 

are the planar polygons bounded by those edges; without loss of generality, we consider faces to be triangles. Relevant to our work is the definition of the total angle θ(p) for points p ∈ M .Following [12], the total angle for points which are either in the interior or on the edge of a triangular face is θ(p) ≜ 2π,since the surface is locally isometric to the Euclidean space at those points; at a vertex νi, we define 

θ(νi) ≜ X 

> Tj∈I (νi)

θTj (νi), (2) where I(νi) is the set of all faces adjacent to vertex νi, and 

θTj (νi) is the angle subtended by face Tj at vertex νi. Based on the total angle, points are classified as spherical ( θ(νi) < 2π), Euclidean ( θ(νi) = 2 π), or hyperbolic ( θ(νi) > 2π), as shown in Fig. 1. 

C. Geometry-Aware Dynamic Movement Primitives 

Dynamic Movement Primitives (DMPs) are an established framework to learn a generalisable representation of sen-sorimotor skills from demonstrations, by encoding expert demonstrations into a dynamical system [15], [40]. Initially developed to operate in Euclidean space, DMPs have sparked interest throughout the robotics community, which has pro-posed their extension to different non-Euclidean manifolds. Among different available formulations, we recall the dis-crete geometry-aware DMP [23] which uses the Riemannian operators on smooth manifolds: 

τ ∇z z = α(βLog p(g) − z) + f (x),τ ˙p = z, τ ˙x = −ζx. 

(3) Here, is the position state (point on the manifold), g ∈ M is the dynamics attractor, z ∈ TpM is the scaled velocity state, 

x ∈ R is a time encoding variable, and f : R → TpM is the forcing function which is learned from a demonstration, and is often modelled as a radial basis functions network. 

D. Gaussian Processes on Manifolds 

GPs are powerful and flexible probabilistic models that define, in a principled manner, distributions over functions conditioned on observed data [41]. Let h : M → R be a real-valued random function defined over a manifold M 1. The function h is said to follow a GP with mean function μ and covariance function k, i.e., 

h ∼ GP (μ, k ), (4) if, for any finite set of m input points P = {pi ∈ M }mi=1 ,the corresponding function values H = h(P ) ∈ Rm are jointly Gaussian distributed with mean μP = μ(P ) ∈ Rm

and covariance matrix KP P = k(P, P ) ∈ Rm×m. The key component of a GP is the kernel function k : M × M → R,which encodes prior information and assumptions about the smoothness and structure of the underlying function. Gaussian process regression (GPR) is the technique that exploits GPs to perform principled probabilistic predictions of the function value outside the training dataset. Given some observed input-output pairs (pi, y i), with yi = h(pi) + εi

and εi ∼ N (0 , σ 2), and a prior h ∼ GP (0 , k ), the posterior distribution h | Y is another GP with the following mean and covariance: 

E {h | Y } = K(·)P

 KP P + σ2I−1Y, (5) 

Cov {h | Y } = K(·,·) − K(·)P

 KP P + σ2I−1KP (·), (6) with Y = ( yi) and (·) denoting arbitrary test locations. 

E. Riemannian Flow Matching 

RFM [4] is a generative modelling framework that extends Continuous Normalising Flows (CNFs) to data supported on Riemannian manifolds in a geometrically consistent manner.        

> 1Generally speaking, hmay be defined on an arbitrary input space X; in this work we are interested in the cases where Xis a manifold. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 5

CNFs learn a smooth, invertible transformation that maps a simple reference distribution into a complex target distribution; RFM generalises this idea to curved spaces by ensuring that the transformation respects the geometry of the manifold. Let 

π : M → R+ be a probability density function on a manifold, and let P be the space of probability densities. RFM seeks to find a probability path πt : [0 , 1] → P that continuously deforms a simple reference distribution πref = π0 into a target data distribution πdata = π1. Such a path is induced by the flow 

ψt : M → M of a time-dependent vector field ut : R × M →

T(·)M , defined as the solution of 

ddt ψt(p) = ut

 ψt(p), ψ0(p) = p. (7) Intuitively, ψt moves particles on the manifold along trajecto-ries dictated by the vector field ut, progressively transporting mass from πref to πdata . The RFM objective is to learn a parametric vector field vt(p, Θ) ∈ T M —generally using Neural Networks (NNs)— which best approximates ut by minimising 

LRFM (Θ) = Et∼U (0 ,1) ,p ∼πt ∥vt(p, Θ) − ut(p)∥2 

> g

, (8) where the norm ∥ · ∥ g is induced by the Riemannian met-ric, ensuring that the discrepancy between vector fields is measured in a geometrically meaningful way. Once vt(·, ·) is learned, samples from πdata are generated by integrating the flow starting from p ∼ πref . The main challenge lies in the construction of the supervision signal ut. In FM, a premetric 

D : M × M → R is a bivariate function on the manifold which is positive definite ( D(p, q ) ≥ 0 ∀ p, q ∈ M and 

D(p, q ) = 0 ⇔ p = q) and non-degenerate ( ∇pD(p, q )̸ =0 ⇔ p̸ = q); intuitively, D generalises the notion of distance without requiring the full structure of a metric. Given amonotonically decreasing scheduler η : [0 , 1] → R with 

η(0) = 1 and η(1) = 0 , the FM objective defines a flow 

ψt that shrinks the premetric D(·, p 1) according to the law 

D ψt(p0|p1), p 1

 = η(t)D(p0, p 1), (9) meaning that particles are steered monotonically closer to their target p1 as t progresses. Chen et al. [4] show that such a flow can be obtained by defining the conditional vector field ut as 

ut(p|p1) = d log η(t)dt D(p, p 1) ∇D(p, p 1)

∥∇ D(p, p 1)∥2

> g

. (10) IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Discrete differential operators 

In this work, we aim at extending methods defined for Riemannian manifolds to polyhedral meshes. For this reason, it is necessary to investigate how to properly define the operators described in Sec. III-A, namely logarithmic and exponential maps, and parallel transport, in the space of meshes M.

1) Tangent cone: On smooth manifolds, it is always possi-ble to define a locally linear approximation of M at a point p,the tangent space TpM. Due to the discrete nature of meshes 

M, this concept is ill-defined at edges and vertices. Still, since meshes are Lipschitz manifolds, we can rely on the  

> Fig. 2. Tangent cone representation (blue-shaded area) for points inside the face (left), on the edge (centre), and on vertices (right).

natural generalisation of tangent spaces: tangent cones . Fol-lowing [42], let pi be a sequence of points on M converging to 

p, and ti a positive sequence decreasing to 0; then the tangent cone TpM consists of all vectors v expressible as: 

v = lim 

> i→∞

pi − pti

. (11) From this definition, we may identify three cases for tangent cones, as depicted in Fig. 2. If the point p lies in the interior of a face Ti, then TpM is isomorphic to the 2-dimensional plane containing Ti. If p lies on an edge, the tangent cone consists of the union of the two half-planes defined by the incident faces on the shared edge. Finally, the tangent cone at a vertex 

vi is formed by all directions spanned by the faces incident to 

vi, resulting in a generally non-flat, piecewise-linear cone. 

2) Logarithmic map: The logarithmic map Log p : M → TpM

q 7 → v (12) is the operator that maps a point q on the mesh into a vector 

v in the tangent cone at p. The vector v represents the initial direction of the shortest path (geodesic) γ from p to q, with a magnitude ∥v∥ equal to the geodesic distance dM(p, q ).As in the smooth case, this operation requires finding the shortest path γ, parameterised by arc-length, joining points 

p and q. While this problem can be challenging for ar-bitrary smooth manifolds, robust algorithmic solutions for the shortest path problem exist for polyhedral meshes. In this respect, the continuous Dijkstra algorithm [43] serves as foundation work to compute discrete geodesics γ. This method generalises the classical graph-based Dijkstra algorithm to continuous domains by propagating a wavefront over the faces of a triangulated surface, maintaining exact Euclidean distances while respecting surface constraints. In this work, we exploit enhanced versions of this algorithm [44], [45] for more efficient implementations. These methods are based on constructing offline accelerated query structures that enable the subsequent real–time generation of shortest paths in fractions of a millisecond. The shortest path γ on M connecting p and q is a polyline which can be easily parameterised by arc-length in the domain 

I = [0 , ℓ ], with ℓ being the path length. In view of this definition, the vector representation v of the point q in TpM

given by the logarithmic map is defined as 

v = Log p(q) ≜ ℓ ˙γ(0) . (13) Figure 3 reports a visual representation of this operator. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 6

TpM

vγpq            

> Fig. 3. Visual representation of the logarithmic map v∈TpMof the point
> q; the blue line is the shortest path γon Mconnecting pand q.

3) Exponential map: The exponential map 

Exp p : TpM → M 

v 7 → q (14) serves as the inverse operation to the logarithmic map; it maps a vector v, defined in the tangent space (or tangent cone) of a point p, to a point q on the mesh M.The exponential map is related to the solution of the initial value problem (IVP) for the geodesic path γ. Parameterised by arc-length, γ starts at γ(0) = p with initial velocity ˙γ(0) = 

v/ |v| and has an overall length ℓ = |v|. In smooth manifolds, the solution to this initial value problem is always (locally) unique [46], and the geodesic path can be computed via the integration of an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) that depends on the intrinsic curvature (and its derivative) of the manifold [47]. In the discrete setting of meshes, the ODE integration approach is ill-defined, as derivatives cannot be evaluated at edges and vertices, which constitute the non-differentiable points of the manifold. A possible strategy to address edge singularities is to compute the planar unfolding of adjacent faces to propagate the vector [43]. Despite this improvement, the solution to the IVP remains ambiguous at vertices, as no unique shortest path may pass through spherical vertices, and an infinite number of shortest paths may pass through hyperbolic points. A unified approach to addressing both vertex and edge singularities was proposed by Polthier and Schmies [12]. In particular, they noted that smooth geodesics are shortest paths, in the sense that they minimise length, but are simultaneously straightest paths, in the sense that they have zero geodesic curvature when measured relative to the manifold itself. Whilst the former property is insufficient to uniquely determine the initial value problem at mesh vertices [43], the latter consistently yields a unique solution. Let γ ⊂ M be a curve on the mesh; given a point g ∈ γ, it is possible to compute the left curve angle θl (respectively, right angle θr ) at the point as the sum of the angles, measured on the mesh, covered clockwise (respectively, counter-clockwise) from the vectors with directions − ˙γ(g) and ˙γ(g), as shown in Fig. 4. By [12, Def. 6], we say that γ is a straightest geodesic if, for any point g in the curve, the left and right curve angles 

θl and θr are equal, and evaluate to half the total angle (2). Exploiting this definition, we define a numerical procedure—outlined in Algorithm 1—to compute the           

> p′′
> p′pq′′
> q′
> qθr
> θl
> θr
> θl
> θr
> θl
> Fig. 4. Straightest geodesics from points p, p ′, p ′′ to q, q ′, q ′′ . Purple points are points gon which we visualise the left and right curve angles θland θr.

Algorithm 1 Iterative procedure to compute the exponential map (14). Figure 5 visually shows the quantities of interested when ˆpk+1 lies either on the inside or outside of the face Tk.

Input: p ∈ M application point, v ∈ TpM vector 

Output: q ∈ M  

> 1:

p0 ← p, v 0 ← v 

> 2:

while |vk| > 0 do  

> 3:

ˆpk+1 ← pk + vk 

> 4:

Tk ← face containing pk, v k 

> 5:

if ˆpk+1 ∈ T k then  

> 6:

q ← ˆpk+1  

> 7:

Return  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

pk+1 ← intersection  pk ˆpk+1 , boundary of Tk

 

> 10:

θ ← total angle (2) at pk+1  

> 11:

w ← vk − (pk+1 − pk) 

> 12:

vk+1 ← rotate −w on M w.r.t. pk+1 by θ/ 2 

> 13:

k ← k + 1  

> 14:

end while 

exponential map (14) that is always well-defined, even when 

v passes through vertices of M. In a iterative fashion, the algorithm displaces p along the direction v and uses the straightest geodesic definition to propagate motion over non-differentiable points for the manifold. Upon initialisation (line 1), we compute the tentative displaced point ˆpk+1 

(line 3). If such a point lies in the interior of the face Tk

containing pk and vk (line 4–5), then we completed the straightest geodesic propagation and ˆpk+1 represents the final exponential mapping q (line 6–7); this case is visually depicted in Fig. 5(a). Otherwise, Fig. 5(b), when ˆpk+1 falls outside Tk, we apply straightest geodesic propagation at the                   

> pk
> ˆpk+1 =qvk
> Tk
> θ/ 2
> vk
> vk+1
> pkˆpk+1
> pk+1
> w−wTk
> Tk+1
> (a) (b) Fig. 5. Visual representation of the logarithmic map v∈TpMof the point
> q; the blue line is the shortest path γon Mconnecting pand q.IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 7

γn(0) 

n(ℓ)˙γ(0) ˙γ(ℓ)

vwpq               

> Fig. 6. Visual representation of the parallel transport of the vector v∈TpM
> into the the tangent cone of q, yielding w∈TqM. We observe that the angle between and ˙γ(0) and vis equal to the angle between ˙γ(ℓ)and w.

singular point; let pk+1 be the point in which vk intersects its containing face (line 9), we compute its total angle θ (line 10) and the remainder vector w (line 11) which accounts for the motion between pk and pk+1 ; by rotating −w intrinsically on the mesh by θ/ 2 (line 12), we construct the vector vk+1 

generating the straightest path at pk+1 . By iterating this procedure, we ensure that vk constantly decreases in length, finally reaching the terminal projection point q.

4) Parallel transport: The parallel transport 

Pp→q : TpM → Tq M

v 7 → w (15) is the operator that enables the expression of a vector v,defined in the tangent cone of a point p, into the different tangent cone placed at q. More in detail, Pp→q defines an isometric transformation that moves vector v into w with zero covariant derivative along the path connecting p and q.In our case, considering that the mesh M is embedded in the Euclidean space R3, it follows that the isometric transformation is a rotation, that we can encode as a matrix 

R ∈ R3×3. To construct such a rotation, we first need to solve the boundary value problem of computing the geodesic path 

γ connecting p and q, as discussed in Sec. IV-A2. Since the velocity vector field is parallel to itself when moving along a geodesic, the parallel transport transformation (15) can be evaluated as 

R(ℓ) ≜  ˙γ(ℓ) n(ℓ) × ˙γ(ℓ) n(ℓ) , (16) 

w ≜ R(ℓ)R⊤(0) v ∈ Tq M, (17) where n(·) : I → R3 is function that assigns each point on the geodesic γ its surface normal vector; this operator is visually represented in Fig. 6. 

5) Ambient space and projections: Most learning methods are based on learning some vector fields ψ : M → T(·)M

defined in the manifold itself. The main problem of this formulation is that it hardly integrates with existing, state of the art implementations which are defined in Euclidean spaces. For this reason, being able to work in the ambient space R3

and constructing an ”augmented” vector field ψ◦ : R3 → R3

approximating ψ on M is often a simpler approach. Based on this idea, it is necessary to define operations to project 

p ∈ M 

p◦ ∈ R3

v ∈ TpM

v◦ ∈ R3

,→ ΠM ,→ Proj p

ψψ◦ 

> Fig. 7. Relationship between elements defined in the mesh domain and in the ambient space.

points and vectors back and forth between the mesh and its embedding space, as depicted in Fig. 7. While transforming a point p from the mesh to p◦ on Euclidean space is trivial, the inverse operation is not. The simplest approach is, in this case, to use the closest point function ΠM to project point back to the discrete manifold: 

ΠM(p◦) ≜ arg min  

> p∈M

∥p − p◦∥. (18) In practice, this projection can be efficiently computed us-ing suitable data structure—such as Axis-Aligned Bounding-Boxes [48]—that accelerate closest-point queries. In the same way, for vectors in the tangent cone TpM,which are trivially embedded in R3, we define Proj p as the projection function that maps vector in R3 back to the tangent cone TpM at the point p:Proj p(v◦) ≜ arg min  

> v∈TpM

∥v − v◦∥. (19) If p lies in the interior of a face, then TpM becomes a plane and Proj p(v◦) simplifies to the normal projection to the plane itself. In all other cases, we rely on the numerical procedure described in Algorithm 2 to perform the projection: first, we project the vector v normally onto all faces (lines 2–8) and onto directed edges (lines 9–14) incident to the point p, and remove all projections outside the tangent cone TpM; we then select (line 15) as projection the candidate which maximises the dot-product w.r.t. the initial vector v.

B. G-DMPs on Meshes 

From the above formulation of the operators on the mesh manifold, it is straightforward to generalise the geometry-aware DMP formulation in (3) to the space of discrete meshes. The core elements that enables the learning of the actual demonstration in DMP is the forcing term f , a function that shall map the phase variable in R into the tangent cone TpM

of the current position state p. A standard way of learning such forcing term is by considering the tangent bundle as an inclusion of the ambient space of the manifold itself; in this way, the DMP effectively learns a forcing term living in a bigger space dimension, e.g., R3 in the case of surfaces, and then either a) they project f in TpM before integrating the systems dynamic, or b) they integrate the unconstrained dynamical system and perform projection of the position state 

y once it starts deviating too much from the manifold itself. We believe that such approach yields poor generalisation capability: considering a policy learned in the trivial surface IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 8

Algorithm 2 Numerical procedure to perform vector projec-tion on the tangent cone (19). 

Input: p ∈ M point defining the tangent cone, v◦ ∈ R3

vector to project 

Output: v ∈ TpM 

> 1:

C ← ∅ empty candidate list  

> 2:

for face Ti around p do  

> 3:

n ← normal of Ti 

> 4:

vpr ← (I − nn ⊤)v◦ ▷ plane projection  

> 5:

if vpr ∈ TpM then ▷ (†) 

> 6:

C ← C ∪ { vpr } ▷ add candidate  

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

for directed edge ei emitting from p do ▷ (‡) 

> 10:

vpr ← (ei · v◦)ei ▷ vector projection  

> 11:

if vpr · v◦ > 0 then  

> 12:

C ← C ∪ { vpr } ▷ add candidate  

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

v ← arg max vpr ∈C vpr · v◦        

> (†): generally, a normally-projected vector may extend on the half-plane which does not contain Ti.(‡): here eiis a unit norm vector; if pis inside an edge, then there are two directed edges such that e1=−e2.

given by the xy plane, then any attempt in integrating the same forcing term on the xz plane would not produce meaningful results. To overcome this issue, other works [9], [13] defined the forcing term f to be locally parameterised by the current state p; while this solution overcomes the problem of having transferable motion policies, the locality of the parameteri-sation may fail in capturing global behaviour of the motion policy itself. In this work, we propose to learn the forcing term f in the tangent cone of a fixed point, and then use parallel transport when executing the motion to retrieve a value properly defined in TpM; for this scope, we select as fixed point the goal configuration g. Given a demonstration D = {pk, ˙pk, ¨pk}Dk=1 ,with pk ∈ M and ˙pk, ¨pk ∈ TpM, firstly we compute the local forcing term fp, · by inverting (3), and then use parallel transport to compute the forcing term fg, · at the motions goal: 

fp,k = τ 2 ¨pk − α βLog pk (g) − τ ˙pk

, (20) 

fg,k = Ppk →g (fp,k ) . (21) In this way, the function fg,k lies in Tg M for all D samples; upon the definition of an isomorphism from the bi-dimensional subspace in R3 given by Tg M to R2, the forcing term can be encoded in a minimal representation as the linear combination of Nb non-linear basis functions. To generalise the motion policy to other final points or different surfaces, it is sufficient to select a new g′ ∈ M ′

in a potentially different mesh M′, and choose a suitable parameterisation to reconstruct a forcing term f ∈ Tg′ M′

from the encoded 2D representation. While integrating, f (x)

is first evaluated at Tg′ M′ and then parallel transported to the current position p tangent cone TpM′, effectively yielding the following manifold-ODE: 

τ ∇z z = α(βLog p(g) − z) + Pg→p

 f (x),τ ˙p = z, τ ˙x = −ζx. 

(22) While (22) can be used to encode and generalise discrete motions, we can use the rhythmic formulation of DMPs to enable learning and execution of periodic motion: 

∇z z = Ω 



α(βLog p(g) − z) + Pg→p

 f (ϕ)

,

˙p = Ω z, 

˙ϕ = 2 πΩ,

(23) where in this case g becomes the centre of the motion and Ω is a time scaling factor associated to the frequency of execution of the motion policy. 

C. Geodesic-based Gaussian Processes 

In this work, we are interested in evaluating GPs (4) for which the input space X is the mesh M. When working on manifolds, the main challenge of using GPs is the definition of a valid kernel function k that must be positive definite for any choice of points in the manifold itself. In Euclidean domain, the squared exponential kernel 

k(x, x ′) = σ2 exp 



− ∥x − x′∥2

2κ2



(24) is one of the most popular choices to induce infinitely mean-square differentiable GPs, with the variance σ2 and length scale κ as hyperparameters. In this work, we propose to use a kernel in which the norm 

∥·∥ in the Euclidean space is simply replaced with the geodesic distance dg on the manifold itself: 

kd(x, x ′) = σ2 exp − d2 

> g

(x, x ′)2κ2

!

. (25) While [33, Theorem. 2] proves that such a kernel may yield negative-definite covariance matrices for some κ > κ th , we believe that in most practical application the threshold κth is big enough to guarantee a correct GPR. For this reason, we designed Algorithm 3 to estimate the value of the maximum admissible length scale value given the set of training data for the GP. We first compute the m × m

distance matrix D between the a set of input points (lines 1–2); then, we follow a bisection based approach to find the critical length scale κth : let κmin (respectively, κmax ) be a length scale for which the kernel is positive (respectively, negative) definite, we first initialise κmin = κ0 and κmax = 2κ0

and iterate (lines 3–9) until we find the pair of length scales satisfying our assumptions; we proceed (lines 10–17) using a standard bisection algorithm when we iteratively evaluate and update the search range based on the positive definiteness of the kernel at the length scale κmid in the middle of κmin 

and κmax , until numerical convergence. Algorithm 3 can be used to compute the critical length scale κth when the set P

of test point is known; if such set is not available upfront, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 9

Algorithm 3 Bisection-based algorithm to find the length scale threshold kth for the kernel (25) on a mesh M.

Input: {pi ∈ M} mi=1 test points, κ0 initial length scale value 

Parameters: δ: numerical accuracy 

Output: κth  

> 1:

initialise the distance (dij ) = D ∈ Rm×m 

> 2:

dij ← dg (pi, p j ) ∀i, j = 1 , . . . , p  

> 3:

κmin ← κ0, κmax ← 2κ0 

> 4:

while exp( −D/ 2κ2

> min

) ≻ 0 do ▷ (†) 

> 5:

κmin ← 2κmin , κmax ← 2κmax  

> 6:

end while  

> 7:

while exp( −D/ 2κ2

> min

) ≺ 0 do ▷ (†) 

> 8:

κmin ← κmin /2, κmax ← κmax /2 

> 9:

end while  

> 10:

while |κmax − κmin | > δ do  

> 11:

κmid ← (κmax + κmin )/2 

> 12:

if exp( −D/ 2κ2

> mid

) ≻ 0 then ▷ (†) 

> 13:

κmin ← κmid  

> 14:

else  

> 15:

κmax ← κmid  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

end while  

> 18:

κth ← κmin 

> (†): matrix obtained by evaluating component-wise the exponential function

it is also possible to run a Montecarlo identification of κth 

by randomly sampling points on M, computing the critical length scale with the algorithm, and choosing the minimum 

κth among all tests. 

D. Riemannian Flow Matching on Meshes 

To successfully implement RFM on meshes, it is necessary to choose a valid premetric D for the space of discrete surfaces. For general geometries, original work [4] proposes the use of spectral-based distances—which can be computed by the Laplace-Beltrami operator—and use a ODE solver on that metric to compute the reference vector field of the training objective (8). In this work, we propose to directly use the shortest path on 

M to measure distance between samples, effectively choosing the geodesic distance dg as valid premetric. Let p0 ∽ πref and 

p1 ∽ πdata two samples on the mesh drawn respectively from the reference and data distributions, we select as corresponding flow ψt the shortest path γ : [0 , 1] → M where γ(0) = p0

and γ(1) = p1; once γ is constructed, sampling points 

pt along the flow for times t ∈ U(0 , 1) , as well as the corresponding tangential velocity vector ut ∝ ˙γ(t), becomes trivial. Algorithm 4 shows how to train RFM on meshes, using the linear scheduler η(t) = 1 − t as in [4]. To avoid restrictions on the topology of the mesh and learn a parameterisation-free vector field, the NN describing vt

directly works in the ambient space R3 of the mesh. Point from the reference distribution πref are uniformly sampled by first selecting a mesh face with probability proportional to its area, and then drawing a point uniformly within the interior of that face. 

Algorithm 4 Riemannian Flow Matching on meshes; training procedure. 

Input: πref ∈ P reference distribution, πdata ∈ P data distribution, η scheduler 

Output: vt(·, Θ) ∈ T(·)M 

> 1:

Initialise parameters Θ of vt 

> 2:

while not converged do  

> 3:

sample time t ∽ U(0 , 1)  

> 4:

sample training example p1 ∽ πdata  

> 5:

sample noise p0 ∽ πref  

> 6:

construct geodesic γ ∈ [0 , 1] → M from p0 to p1 

> 7:

pt ← γ(t) 

> 8:

˙γt ← ˙γ(t) 

> 9:

ut ← ℓ ˙γt/| ˙γt| 

> 10:

Θ = optimiser_step  |vt(pt, Θ) − ut|2 

> 11:

end while Algorithm 5 Riemannian Flow Matching on meshes; gener-ating samples from a trained NN. 

Input: vt(p, Θ) learned conditional vector field, M mesh, δt

integration step size 

Output: q ∽ πdata  

> 1:

t ← 0 

> 2:

p ← sample from πref on M 

> 3:

while t < 1 do  

> 4:

v◦ ← vt(p, Θ)  

> 5:

v ← Proj p(v◦) 

> 6:

p ← Exp p(δt v) 

> 7:

t ← t + δt 

> 8:

end while  

> 9:

q ← p

To drawn a sample distributed as πdata given the trained vector field vt, we first extract a sample p0 from the ref-erence distribution and perform a mesh-based integration technique over the field by consistently projecting the NN outcome on the mesh tangent cone using (19), followed by the geometrically-consistent exponential map operation (14), as shown in Algorithm 5. V. S IMULATION RESULTS 

In this section, we evaluate and compare the proposed methodology against state-of-the-art approaches. Section V-A compares our DMP with the MeshDMP framework [9], Sec V-B compares our geodesic-based squared exponential kernel with the one computed from the Laplace-Beltrami operator introduced in [10], while Sec. V-C compares our Mesh Flow Matching against the RFM approach in [4]. Our method has been implemented fully in C++ and it relies on the CGAL library for polyhedral mesh operations [49], [50]. Experiments in Sec. V-A and V-B have been carried out on a commercial laptop equipped with an Intel Core i7 Ultra 155H , 24GB of RAM, and a NVidia RTX 4060 graphics card with 8GB of VRAM. For the experiments on Flow Matching (Sec. V-C), we used a workstation equipped with an AMD Ryzen 9900X CPU with with 12 cores, 96 GB of RAM, and a 

NVidia RTX 5090 graphics card with 32 GB of VRAM. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 10                  

> TABLE II MAIN MESHES USED FOR EXPERIMENTS AND CORRESPONDING NUMBER OF FACES AND VERTICES . U PSAMPLING ACHIEVED BY MIDPOINT SUBDIVISION .Mesh n. of faces n. of vertices 3 faces of a cube 67
> 3 faces of a cube ( 4×upsampling) 1 536 817
> 3 faces of a cube ( 6×upsampling) 24 576 12 481
> Spot the Cow [51] 5 856 2 930
> Stanford Dragon [52] 9 983 4 898
> Stanford Bunny [52] 5 000 2 502
> Fig. 8. DMP transferability comparison against [9]. Both DMP methods have been trained on the same 8-shaped demonstration on the flat plane, and have been generalised onto the Stanford bunny mesh, with equal initial state and centre. The green line represent our method, while the red one is the baseline MeshDMP result.

For testing, we used several meshes, whose main properties are summarised in Table II. 

A. Comparison against MeshDMP 

We compare against the MeshDMP [9] framework on the representative task of learning an 8-shaped trajectory demon-strated in the trivial, flat surface, and generalise the policy to the Stanford Bunny mesh. Both approaches utilise same DMP parameters ( α = 48 , β = α/ 4, γ = 5 , and 20 basis) and are initialised at the same initial state, allowing the direct behaviour comparison between MeshDMP and the rhythmic DMP (23). As depicted in Fig. 8, both methods quickly converge to the limit cycle induced by the 8-shaped trajectory in the initial phase of execution. Differences, however, arise when we let system integrate their dynamics over a longer time horizon. Particularly, we observe that DMP (23) remains faithful to the limit cycle, while MeshDMP exhibits an undesired rotational behavior around the fixed motions centre. Such a difference can be attributed on how the two methods encode the forcing term f used during DMP integration. MeshDMP encodes this term using a local parameterisation that fails in capturing the dynamics change induced by the mesh curvature. Our method, instead, overcomes this limitation by encoding f in a fixed     

> Fig. 9. Exponential map comparison against [9]. First we compute the geodesic path (green) between the two orange points, and the logarithmic map
> vbetween them. Then we compute the exponential map of vwith Algorithm 1 (yellow) and the MeshDMP-proposed algorithm (red). The reconstructed path by our method coincides, up to numerical precision, with the reference geodesic.

coordinate system and use a geometrically-consistent parallel transport operation to ensure that the forcing term is correctly applied at the actual DMP position state. Additionally, other known limitations of MeshDMP may contribute to these behaviours. Remarkably, Dalle Vedove et al. relied on a local approximation of the exponential map based on surface normal projection, which is only accurate for sufficiently small vectors and restricts its applicability to surfaces whose relative angle between edge-adjacent faces is less then 90 ◦. The local approximation of MeshDMPs exponential map is shown in Fig. 9, where we compare the two integration schemes applied to a long vector, showing how exponential map (14) can faithfully reconstruct a geodesic on the Mesh. 

B. Gaussian Processes 

In this section, we evaluate the performance of the pro-posed geodesic-based kernel for GPR on discrete surfaces. We compare our approach against the state-of-the-art work by Borovitskiy et al. [10], where authors used the spectral properties of the Laplace-Beltrami operator to define kernels on compact manifolds, including the discrete space of meshes. Starting by the consideration that, in Euclidean space, GPs are the solution of a stochastic differential equations that depends on the Laplacian ∆ [53], they generalise such formulation to Riemman manifolds by replacing the Laplacian with the Laplace-Beltrami operator ∆g ; by computing the orthonormal basis given by the eigenfunction-eigenvalue pairs {(fn, λ n)}

such that 

−∇ g f =

> ∞

X

> n=0

λn⟨f, f n⟩fn, (26) authors define the squared exponential kernel to be 

k∆(x, x ′) = σ2

C

> ∞

X

> n=0

e− κ22 λn fn(x)fn(x′). (27) IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 11                   

> (a) (b)
> (c) (d) 0.100 0 .125 0 .150 0 .175 0 .200 0 .225 0 .250
> Lengthscale κ
> 0.00.10.20.30.40.5
> Mean Absolute Error
> Geodesic kernel Laplace-Beltrami kernel (e) 0.100 0 .125 0 .150 0 .175 0 .200 0 .225 0 .250
> Lengthscale κ
> 0.00.10.20.30.40.5
> Mean Absolute Error
> Geodesic kernel Laplace-Beltrami kernel (f) Fig. 10. Experiment on a mesh composed of three vertex-adjacent faces of a cube. The ground truth (a) is evaluated at the vertices of a mesh upsampled to 817 vertices and 1 536 faces by computing the sine of the geodesic distance from a fixed point. The noise-free GP predictions are obtained using 70 ground-truth samples with (b) the geodesic based kernel (25) and (c–d) the Laplace-Beltrami kernel (27) with κ= 0 .18 , σ = 1 . Panels (e–f) report the median MAE together with the 10th-90th percentile range as a function of the length scale, computed over 100 experiments, each using 70 randomly selected test vertices. Figures (c) and (e) use the upsampled mesh, while (d) and (f) use a further upsampled mesh with 12 481 vertices and 24 576 faces. (b–d) show the worst-performing samples in their respective category for the selected length scale.

Here, κ and σ are respectively the length scale and variance hyperparameters as in (25), and C is a normalising constant; for computational purposes, the evaluation of the kernel (27) is truncated. While the kernel (27) offers the advantage of being positive-definite for any value of κ, it suffers from at least two major limitations: a) it implicitly assumes the mesh to be sufficiently smooth, effectively considering it as an approximation of a surface; b) the Laplace-Beltrami operator ∆g can only be evaluated at the vertices of such a mesh. It follows that predicting function values at arbitrary points, specifically ones located at the interior of the faces, either requires additional interpolation steps, thus introducing approximation errors, or upsampling the mesh to let the test point become a new vertex for the mesh, effectively increasing the model complexity. The geodesic-based kernel (25), instead, automatically solves this problem by enabling the computation of geodesics at arbitrary points. As an illustrative example, we consider the problem of performing GPR on a non-smooth, trivial surface composed by 3 vertex-adjacent faces of a cube, shown in Fig. 10. A minimal representation of this mesh consists of 7 vertices and 3 faces 2; however, to enable a valid application of the Laplace-Beltrami-based kernel (27), we rely on midpoint subdivision to upsample the mesh up to 817 vertices and 1 536 faces. We additionally test GPR on a further upsampled mesh with 

12 481 vertices and 24 576 faces. To evaluate k∆, we used the GEOMETRIC KERNELS package [54], and use the first 1 000 

eigenfunction as basis. By constructing a ground-truth function on the mesh, we compute a noise-free GP prediction (5) using both kernels, and evaluate regression performance using the mean absolute error (MAE) metric. We run 100 experiments, each randomly selecting 70 vertices from the upsampled 

> 2For the experiments, we used a triangulated version of the mesh which actually has 6 faces.

mesh as training data, enabling a statistical characterisation of performance across different length scale values. While the two methods exhibit comparable performance at small length scales, we observe that the Laplace-Beltrami-based kernel becomes unstable for larger values of κ, with the MAE in some cases degrading to unacceptable levels. In contrast, the geodesic-based kernel remains well behaved, provided that the critical length κth is not reached. Moreover, as shown in Fig 10(d), further increasing the polygonal density of the mesh, which is used to discretise the Laplace-Beltrami operator on a non-smooth surface, leads to degraded performance. This behaviour is a consequence of the assumption of a smooth underlying manifold implicitly made by the Laplace-Beltrami operator: increasing the mesh resolution in the presence of geometric discontinuities, amplifies the discretisation errors, ultimately resulting in a breakdown of the GPR model. A similar experiment, Fig. 11, has been ran on the Stanford Dragon mesh with 9 983 faces and 4 898 vertices. Also in this case, our proposed kernel performs slightly better than the Laplace-Beltrami based solution in the whole spectrum of length scales below the critical value of kth = 0 .023 , which is assessed through the Algorithm 3. 

Computation performance: To fully compare the meth-ods, we also evaluate their computational performance both in terms of time required to construct the necessary data structures and to compute the covariance matrices. The sum-marising results are reported in Table III. Within our method, it is necessary to construct a data structure for each set of input point for the kernel; upon their construction, the evaluation time of the covariance ma-trices is approximately linear w.r.t. the number of test points. On the other hand, Laplace-Beltrami based method require the one-time eigenfunction decomposition—which is time demanding—but then provides an overall faster inference. Our method shows its maximum strength in all cases in IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 12 

(b) (a) (c) 0.008 0.010 0.012 0.014 0.016 0.018 0.020 0.022 

Lengthscale κ

> 0.20.30.40.5
> Mean Absolute Error  Geodesic kernel Laplace-Beltrami kernel

(d) Fig. 11. Experiment on the Stanford Dragon mesh, downsampled to 9 983 

faces and 4 898 vertices. (a) Kernel with length scale κ = 0 .018 evaluated at some test points; (b) ground truth computed as the sine of the geodesic distance from a fixed point; (c) noise-free GPR with κ = 0 .02 using the geodesic based kernel (25); (d) median and 10th-90th percentile range MAE across 100 experiments sampling each 48 points randomly on the mesh. 

which the mesh is not known upfront, e.g., for time-varying surfaces, it is small to medium sized (up to 5 000 faces), and it is limited to the computation of the shortest path on M,which is delegated to external libraries. 

C. Mesh Flow Matching 

To fairly compare our proposed Mesh Flow Matching against the baseline, we integrated our mesh operators in the official implementation of the RFM framework provided by [4]. As in the reference paper, the surface used for the experiment is the Stanford Bunny, decimated to 5 000 

faces, and Spot the Cow. To construct the non-trivial target distribution that must be learned from the generative model, 

500 000 samples are drawn from the mesh by computing the 

i-th eigenfunction of the Laplace-Beltrami operator (26) and sampling points on M proportionally to the thresholded eigen-function value. The dataset is split into training, validation, and test sets using an 80–10–10 ratio. An example of target data distribution and sample reconstruction with our mesh RFM method is reported in Fig. 12. To evaluate the regression performance, we compute the negative log-likelihood (NLL) by averaging the log density 

log πdata (p) of all samples in the test dataset. Following [34], log-density is computed as 

log πdata (p) = log πref (p0) − f0(p), (28) 

TABLE III MEDIAN COMPUTATION TIME OF COVARIANCE MATRICES FOR BASED ON THE NUMBER OF TEST POINTS m ON SOME MESHES . F OR EACH MESH , WE REPORT THE EIGENFUNCTION COMPUTATION TIME ; (·) HERE REPRESENT THE SET OF ALL VERTICES OF THE MESH .Geodesic Kernel Laplace-Beltrami Kernel 

m setup KP P K(·)P KP P K(·)P

Cube ( 240 ms and 87 s) 

20 0.343 ms 0.234 ms 4.9 ms 0.739 ms 4.3 ms 

40 0.566 ms 0.554 ms 9.08 ms 1.07 ms 5.24 ms 

80 0.695 ms 1.13 ms 9.88 ms 1.37 ms 5.59 ms 

160 1.37 ms 4.23 ms 19 .2 ms 2.82 ms 7.49 ms 

320 3.39 ms 14 .1 ms 32 .2 ms 6.14 ms 11 .2 ms Spot the Cow ( 27 s) 

20 472 ms 0.694 ms 15 .1 ms 0.868 ms 9.18 ms 

40 921 ms 0.941 ms 29 .6 ms 0.967 ms 9.98 ms 

80 1.73 s 3.45 ms 59 ms 1.21 ms 11 ms 

160 3.43 s 11 .9 ms 112 ms 2.14 ms 18 .6 ms 

320 6.74 s 40 .1 ms 224 ms 4.44 ms 29 .1 ms Stanford Dragon ( 49 s) 

20 565 ms 0.75 ms 37 .4 ms 0.863 ms 17 .8 ms 

40 1.05 s 1.52 ms 67 .9 ms 0.925 ms 19 .4 ms 

80 2.15 s 5.14 ms 128 ms 1.35 ms 23 .3 ms 

160 4.22 s 19 .3 ms 242 ms 2.09 ms 42 .9 ms 

320 8.37 s 61 .8 ms 477 ms 4.43 ms 147 ms For the 3 vertex-adjacent faces of the cube, we report the eigenfunction computation time both for the 4× and 6× upsampling. 

(a) (b) Fig. 12. Target distribution (a) based on the 50th Laplace-Beltrami eigen-function and 20 000 samples (b) generated with our geodesic flow-matching on the Stanford Bunny. 

where ft is obtained solving backward in time from t = 1 to 

t = 0 the ODE 

ddt

 pt

ft(p)



=

 vt(pt)

−div g(vt)( pt)



(29) subject to the initial condition  p1, f 1(p)⊤ = ( p, 0) ⊤; here, div g is the Riemannian divergence. Table IV reports the test NLL—evaluated at the model checkpoint with lowest validation NLL—of our method, and the RFM baseline which uses diffusion and biharmonic pre-metrics computed on the first 200 eigenfunctions. All models have been trained with the same parameters and seeds, using a Dense NN with 6 layers of 512 neurons each with the Swish activation function [55], and using the ADAM optimiser with a learning rate of 10 −4. Across all experiments, our method consistently achieves lower test NLL, indicating improved IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 13                                                                    

> TABLE IV TEST NLL ON THE STANFORD BUNNY WITH DATASET GENERATED FROM THE i-TH EIGENFUNCTION . L OWER IS BETTER .Geodesic (ours) Diffusion Biharmonic Stanford Bunny
> i= 10 0.81 ±0.11.16 ±0.02 1.06 ±0.05
> i= 50 0.76 ±0.51.48 ±0.01 1.55 ±0.01
> i= 100 1.43 ±0.05 1.53 ±0.01 1.49 ±0.01
> Spot the Cow
> i= 10 0.54 ±0.10.87 ±0.07 1.02 ±0.06
> i= 50 0.76 ±0.04 0.95 ±0.16 1.08 ±0.05
> i= 100 0.83 ±0.11.08 ±0.05 1.29 ±0.05

generative performance when using geometry-aware operators defined directly on the mesh. 

Computation performance: The claimed advantage of Laplace-Beltrami based spectral operators, is that they limit the computation time by only considering a fixed, relatively small number of eigenfunctions—200 in this case. However, since the integration of the spectral measures doesn’t guarantee the path to lie on the mesh, closest-point projections are required by the baseline algorithm at every step, effectively slowing down the integration process. On the other hand, our method—by using the exponential map (14)—is always guaranteed, during ODE integration, to generate paths which are consistent with the underlying surface. Additionally, during the training (Algorithm 4), the time-intensive geodesic path computation between samples p0 and p1 is amortised by the cheap upsampling over time of the vector field ut.From our experience, performing 100 000 update steps of the network with batches of 128 samples, and calling avalidation routine every 2 000 steps to save model checkpoints, typically takes 1 day and 6 hours for the baseline method, while the proposed method takes on average 20 hours. VI. E XPERIMENTS 

A. Handwritten symbols learning and generalisation 

The key feature of DMPs is their high generalisation capa-bility, which enables the execution of motion policies to new, unseen initial and final condition while preserving the topology of the learned path by exploiting spatial and temporal invari-ance properties. As highlighted in (22) and (23), exploiting the definition of surface operators on discrete manifolds, it is possible to learn motion policies that can be transferred to different meshes. We show this with an experiment in which user-acquired demonstration are generalised to different surfaces to enable a robotic manipulator drawing on them. For this experiment, we created 4 surfaces generated as the plot of continuous functions of type H : R2 → R;upon fixing a triangulated grid on the 20 × 20 cm squared domain, we construct the discrete approximation of the surface 

(x, y ) 7 →  x, y, H (x, y ), and we 3D printed these samples. To recreate a realistic scenario of a smooth surface, the 3D printed components is generated with a high polygonal density, with the triangulated grid having 500 × 500 points; during experiments, instead, we relied on a coarser mesh defined on 

> Fig. 13. Four experiment of drawing robot; for each experiment we report the demonstrated path (obtained by drawing on a tablet), the trajectory generalised on the target mesh, and the corresponding execution with the robot.

grids ranging from 40 × 40 to 80 × 80 points. To enable robot motion on the surface, the mesh samples have been localised relative to the base of the Franka Research 3 manipulator [56] that we used as robotic platform. To compensate localisation inaccuracies, we employed an hybrid force-impedance control; particularly, the robot was prompted to track a 5 N force along the pencil direction, while other axis were set on impedance IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 14 

control with linear stiffness of 4 000 N/m, rotational stiffness 

100 Nm/rad, and critical damping. To ease robot teaching, we designed a simple and intuitive web-based Graphical User Interface (GUI) in which non-expert users can sketch shapes on a tablet, and then decide which type of DMP to use through buttons. The system immediately learns the flat demonstration and generalises it to all target meshes, creating 40 000 trajectory samples typically in less then 5 s; the GUI also enables updating DMPs parameters—such as starting and final configuration, or motion centre—and control the robot behaviour, like starting or stopping the execution of the motion on a specific surface. Since the proposed DMPs on surfaces provide only position information for the robots end effector, we select the orien-tation of the pencil to be normal to the surface by exploiting the normal map given by the mesh itself. This choice leads to non-differentiable orientation trajectories when transitioning between faces; for this reason, we firstly precompute the whole trajectory, and then use a symmetric sliding-window filter to smoothen the orientation component. Figure 13 effectively shows how the proposed operators on meshes, paired with DMPs (22) and (23), can generalise the motion from the flat plane to the different types of surfaces. Since the operators require no smoothness condition of the mesh M, our method works also when the underlying function 

H is non-differentiable in some point locus, as in the case depicted in the last column of that figure. We refer to the accompanying video for more experiments. 

B. Surface polishing 

In this experiment, we show how our methodology can be easily integrated in a larger framework for fully autonomous surface polishing, where the surface is reconstructed from sensory data. We consider the setup in Fig. 14, where the robot is equipped with an Intel Realsense D405 RGB-D camera. The depth camera is used to generate a point cloud of the ob-served scene, which enables online surface reconstruction and, through simple computer vision algorithms, the generation of polishing motions on the target surface using our rhythmic DMP. As target workpiece, we use a blue-coloured component with non-flat surface, and draw a line on it with a orange chalk; by using range thresholding on the HSL-channels of the colour image, we masked the drawn line and proceeded fitting a polynomial on it, as shown in Fig. 14(a). To improve mesh reconstruction reliability, we use a waterfront expanding algorithm to segment the full point cloud in the region of interested given by the polynomial path. To further reduce computational burden, we used Voxel downsampling with cell size of 5 mm on the segmented point cloud, and then proceeded in using the Poisson surface reconstruction algorithm [57] to generate a watertight, manifold mesh that we can use for planning. In our experiments, the proposed pipeline takes from 1 to 10 seconds, based on point-cloud quality; for the experiment shown in Fig. 14, the generated mesh had 1 344 

vertices and 2 617 faces. To achieve the polishing behaviour over the surface, we first trained a rhythmic DMP (23) on a circular motion on the     

> (a) (b)
> (c) (d) (e) Fig. 14. RGB image acquired from the end-effector mounted camera with polynomial path automatically computed by computer-vision algorithms (a). Point cloud with polishing-like trajectory generated on the surface (b). Surface before (c) and after (d) the polishing operation, and snapshot of the robot (e) executing the polishing behaviour.

flat surface. We then generalised the policy to the point cloud-reconstructed mesh, and achieve a polishing-like behaviour by slowly shifting the DMP centre g along the properly projected fitted polynomial. Fixed the velocity of the shifting centre along the path to 5 mm/s and a time-per-revolution of 2 s, the algorithm generates offline the full position trajectory at 

100 Hz typically in less then five seconds. The resulting motion is overlaid on the acquired point cloud in Fig. 14(b). For robotic execution, we equipped the end-effector with a soft sponge, and leverage the hybrid force-impedance con-troller to exert a constant force on the surface. The generated trajectory is upsampled to 1 kHz and, as in Sec. VI-A, we assign the orientation to be normal to the surface; to ensure smoothness of the orientation signal, we used a symmetric sliding window of 1 s. Figure 14(c)–(e) reports the surface before and after the robot polishing, showing how the proposed methodology can be effectively integrated in real tasks where the object surface is not known upfront. VII. D ISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 

In this work, we developed a suite of geometrically con-sistent operators—logarithmic and exponential map, parallel transport, and ambient space projections—that extend Rieman-nian differential geometry to the realm of discrete surfaces modelled by polyhedral meshes. The core of our approach is to work directly on the intrinsic geometry of the surfaces, rather than considering the surfaces as mere constraints to be enforced a posteriori . We successfully applied these operators to a diverse set of geometry-aware learning methods relevant to the robotics community, namely DMPs, GPs, and RFM. Concerning DMPs, by encoding the forcing term within a fixed tangent cone and reconstructing it through par-allel transport, we eliminate the limit-cycle instability of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 15 

prior approaches, constructing motion policies that gen-eralise better across multiple surfaces. We validated our approach in simulation—comparing against the MeshDMP framework [9]—and on a real end-to-end LfD pipeline, with a Franka Research 3 manipulator reproducing tablet-drawn trajectories. Both the simulation and the real-world experiment demonstrate the numerical efficiency of the approach. As re-gards GPs, replacing spectral Laplace-Beltrami measures [10] with a geodesic-based kernel removes all smoothness as-sumptions for the underlying surface, enabling regression at arbitrary locations on the surface without interpolation. This technique is particularly effective on coarse meshes. Finally, for RFMs, the integration of mesh-specific operators improves generative quality compared to spectral baselines, whilst reducing training time by approximately half. Taken together, these results suggest a remarkable advance towards bridging geometry-aware learning theory and the mesh representations employed in robotics. The cornerstone of our construction is a principled application of discrete differential geometry. 

Limitations: Although we believe that the advances brought about by our approach are substantial, some of the present limitations should not be overlooked, as they also offer interesting opportunities for future investigations. First, the geodesic pre-computation remains a bottleneck. Since it relies on algorithms with complexity O(N 2 log N ), where N

is the number of faces of the mesh, this computation becomes a significant barrier when the surface exceeds 10 000 faces. Second, the geodesic-based kernel cannot be guaranteed to be positive-definite when the lengthscale exceeds some critical value κth . This unavoidable problem comes with the risk of generating inconsistent GPs when the kernel is evaluated beyond the critical value. While Algorithm 3 offers a practical safeguard, a better characterisation of the threshold κth is required—particularly by relating this coefficient to surface curvature and topology, as well as the number of sampled points. 

Future directions: Whilst this paper presents a strong mathematical foundation and three important application paradigms, we believe that much remains to be done to extend the framework to a broader set of applications. One promising research avenue is to tackle the challenges posed by the extension of the formulation to learn force trajectories on surfaces and, at the same time, to transfer them across surfaces with different topologies. Another open research direction is to extend the framework to time-varying surfaces, e.g., to enable motion planning for surgical appli-cations on human bodies whose pose is estimated online via parameterised meshes that evolve over time with the patient’s movements. REFERENCES [1] L. Sentis and O. Khatib, “Synthesis of whole-body behaviors through hierarchical control of behavioral primitives,” International Journal of Humanoid Robotics , vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 505–518, 2005. [2] S. Calinon, “Gaussians on Riemannian manifolds: Applications for robot learning and adaptive control,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine (RAM) , vol. 27, pp. 33–45, June 2020. [3] N. Jaquier, L. Rozo, D. G. Caldwell, and S. Calinon, “Geometry-aware manipulability learning, tracking, and transfer,” International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR) , vol. 40, pp. 624–650, Feb. 2021. [4] R. T. Q. Chen and Y. Lipman, “Flow matching on general geometries,” in 12th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2024. [5] F. J. Abu-Dakka and V. Kyrki, “Geometry-aware dynamic movement primitives,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 4421–4426, 2020. [6] M. Berger, A. Tagliasacchi, L. M. Seversky, P. Alliez, G. Guennebaud, J. A. Levine, A. Sharf, and C. T. Silva, “A survey of surface recon-struction from point clouds,” Computer Graphics Forum , vol. 36, no. 1, p. 301–329, 2017. [7] A. Hubeli and M. Gross, “A survey of surface representations for geometric modeling,” tech. rep., ETH Zurich, Department of Computer Science, 2000. [8] M. Pantic, L. Ott, C. Cadena, R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto, “Mesh manifold based riemannian motion planning for omnidirectional micro aerial vehicles,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 4790–4797, 2021. [9] M. Dalle Vedove, F. J. Abu-Dakka, L. Palopoli, D. Fontanelli, and M. Saveriano, “Meshdmp: Motion planning on discrete manifolds using dynamic movement primitives,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 895–901, 2025. [10] V. Borovitskiy, A. Terenin, P. Mostowsky, and M. P. Deisenroth, “Mat´ ern gaussian processes on riemannian manifolds,” in Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,NIPS ’20, (Red Hook, NY, USA), Curran Associates Inc., 2020. [11] A. I. Bobenko and Y. B. Suris, Discrete differential geometry: Integrable structure . Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society, 2023. [12] K. Polthier and M. Schmies, “Straightest geodesics on polyhedral surfaces,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Courses on - SIGGRAPH ’06 ,SIGGRAPH ’06, p. 30, ACM Press, 2006. [13] X. Xue, J. Dong, Z. Lu, and N. Wang, “A robotic learning and generalization framework for curved surface based on modified dmp,” 

Robotics and Autonomous Systems , vol. 160, p. 104323, 2023. [14] A. G. Billard, S. Calinon, and R. Dillmann, “Learning from humans,” 

Springer handbook of robotics , pp. 1995–2014, 2016. [15] M. Saveriano, F. Abu-Dakka, A. Kramberger, and L. Peternel, “Dynamic movement primitives in robotics: A tutorial survey,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 42, no. 13, pp. 1133–1184, 2023. [16] A. Paraschos, C. Daniel, J. R. Peters, and G. Neumann, “Probabilis-tic movement primitives,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 26, 2013. [17] Y. Huang, L. Rozo, J. Silv´ erio, and D. G. Caldwell, “Kernelized movement primitives,” The International Journal of Robotics Research ,vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 833–852, 2019. [18] S. Calinon, “A tutorial on task-parameterized movement learning and retrieval,” Intelligent service robotics , vol. 9, pp. 1–29, 2016. [19] A. Ude, B. Nemec, T. Petri´ c, and J. Morimoto, “Orientation in carte-sian space dynamic movement primitives,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , pp. 2997–3004, 2014. [20] F. J. Abu-Dakka and M. Saveriano, “Variable impedance control and learning-a review,” Front. Robot. AI , vol. 7, p. 590681, Dec. 2020. [21] L. Koutras and Z. Doulgeri, “A correct formulation for the orientation dynamic movement primitives for robot control in the cartesian space,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Robot Learning (L. P. Kaelbling, D. Kragic, and K. Sugiura, eds.), vol. 100 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 293–302, PMLR, 30 Oct–01 Nov 2020. [22] J. Kim, M. Sung, Y. Choi, J. Park, and W. K. Chung, “Impedance control design framework using commutative map between se (3) and se (3) ,” 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 41, pp. 6193–6212, 2025. [23] F. J. Abu-Dakka, M. Saveriano, and V. Kyrki, “A unified formulation of geometry-aware discrete dynamic movement primitives,” Neurocomput-ing , vol. 598, p. 128056, 2024. [24] N. D. Ratliff, J. Issac, D. Kappler, S. Birchfield, and D. Fox, “Rieman-nian motion policies,” 2018. [25] E. Dimas and D. Briassoulis, “3D geometric modelling based on NURBS: a review,” Adv. Eng. Softw. , vol. 30, pp. 741–751, Sept. 1999. [26] I. Boier-Martin and D. Zorin, “Differentiable parameterization of catmull-clark subdivision surfaces,” in ACM Symposium on Geometry Processing , pp. 155–164, Association for Computing Machinery, 2004. [27] G. P. T. Choi, Y. Leung-Liu, X. Gu, and L. M. Lui, “Parallelizable global conformal parameterization of simply-connected surfaces via partial welding,” SIAM J. Imaging Sci. , vol. 13, pp. 1049–1083, Jan. 2020. [28] B. Vallet and B. L´ evy, “Spectral geometry processing with manifold harmonics,” Comput. Graph. Forum , vol. 27, pp. 251–260, Apr. 2008. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS, VOL. XX, NO. XX, FEBRUARY 2026 16 

[29] K. Crane, F. de Goes, M. Desbrun, and P. Schr¨ oder, “Digital geometry processing with discrete exterior calculus,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2013 Courses , (New York, NY, USA), ACM, July 2013. [30] G. Patan´ e, “Laplacian spectral distances and kernels on 3d shapes,” 

Pattern Recognition Letters , vol. 47, pp. 102–110, 2014. Advances in Mathematical Morphology. [31] L. Koestler, D. Grittner, M. Moeller, D. Cremers, and Z. L¨ ahner, “Intrinsic neural fields: Learning functions on manifolds,” in European Conference on Computer Vision (S. Avidan, G. Brostow, M. Ciss´ e, G. M. Farinella, and T. Hassner, eds.), (Cham), pp. 622–639, Springer Nature Switzerland, 2022. [32] A. Lang and M. Pereira, “Galerkin–Chebyshev approximation of gaus-sian random fields on compact riemannian manifolds,” BIT , vol. 63, Dec. 2023. [33] A. Feragen, F. Lauze, and S. Hauberg, “Geodesic exponential kernels: When curvature and linearity conflict,” in IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 3032–3042, IEEE, June 2015. [34] R. T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. Duvenaud, “Neural ordinary differential equations,” in Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS’18, (Red Hook, NY, USA), p. 6572–6583, Curran Associates Inc., 2018. [35] Y. Lipman, R. T. Q. Chen, H. Ben-Hamu, M. Nickel, and M. Le, “Flow matching for generative modeling,” in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [36] X. Liu, C. Gong, and Q. Liu, “Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow,” in The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. [37] M. P. do Carmo, Riemannian geometry . Mathematics: theory &applications, Boston: Birkh¨ auser, 14., corrected print. ed., 2013. Aus dem Portug. ¨ ubers. - Literaturverz. S. [292] - 296. [38] W. Hassler, “The self-intersections of a smooth n-manifold in 2n-space,” 

Ann. Math. , vol. 45, p. 220, Apr. 1944. [39] L. De Floriani and A. Hui, “Data structures for simplicial complexes: an analysis and a comparison,” in Proceedings of the Third Euro-graphics Symposium on Geometry Processing , SGP ’05, (Goslar, DEU), p. 119–es, Eurographics Association, 2005. [40] A. J. Ijspeert, J. Nakanishi, H. Hoffmann, P. Pastor, and S. Schaal, “Dynamical movement primitives: Learning attractor models for motor behaviors,” Neural Computation , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 328–373, 2013. [41] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning . The MIT Press, Nov. 2005. [42] F. Clarke, Functional Analysis, Calculus of Variations and Optimal Control . Springer London, 2013. [43] J. S. B. Mitchell, D. M. Mount, and C. H. Papadimitriou, “The discrete geodesic problem,” SIAM Journal on Computing , vol. 16, pp. 647–668, Aug. 1987. [44] J. Chen and Y. Han, “Shortest paths on a polyhedron,” in Proceedings of the sixth annual symposium on Computational geometry - SCG ’90 ,SCG ’90, pp. 360–369, ACM Press, 1990. [45] S.-Q. Xin and G.-J. Wang, “Improving chen and han’s algorithm on the discrete geodesic problem,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 28, pp. 1–8, Aug. 2009. [46] M. P. do Carmo, Differential geometry of curves and surfaces . Mathe-matics, Mineola, New York: Dover Publications,Inc., revised & updated second edition ed., 2016. [47] M. Kniely and W. Ring, “Riemannian methods for optimization in a shape space of triangular meshes,” Inverse Problems in Science and Engineering , vol. 23, pp. 1011–1039, Nov. 2014. [48] C. Ericson, Real-Time Collision Detection . Morgan Kaufmann series in interactive 3D technology, London, England: CRC Press, Dec. 2004. [49] The CGAL Project, CGAL User and Reference Manual . CGAL Editorial Board, 6.1.1 ed., 2026. [50] S. Kiazyk, S. Loriot, and ´ E. C. de Verdi` ere, “Triangulated surface mesh shortest paths,” in CGAL User and Reference Manual , CGAL Editorial Board, 6.1.1 ed., 2026. [51] K. Crane, U. Pinkall, and P. Schr¨ oder, “Robust fairing via conformal curvature flow,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 1–10, 2013. [52] B. Curless and M. Levoy, “A volumetric method for building complex models from range images,” in Proceedings of the 23rd annual confer-ence on Computer graphics and interactive techniques , ACM, 1996. [53] P. Whittle, “Stochastic processes in serveral dimensions,” Bulletin of the International Statistical Institute , vol. 40, pp. 974–994, 1963. [54] P. Mostowsky, V. Dutordoir, I. Azangulov, N. Jaquier, M. J. Hutchinson, A. Ravuri, L. Rozo, A. Terenin, and V. Borovitskiy, “The geomet-rickernels package: Heat and mat´ ern kernels for geometric learning on manifolds, meshes, and graphs,” arXiv:2407.08086 , 2024. [55] P. Ramachandran, B. Zoph, and Q. V. Le, “Searching for activation functions,” in International Conference on Learning Representations ,2018. [56] S. Haddadin, S. Parusel, L. Johannsmeier, S. Golz, S. Gabl, F. Walch, M. Sabaghian, C. J¨ ahne, L. Hausperger, and S. Haddadin, “The franka emika robot: A reference platform for robotics research and education,” 

IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine , vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 46–64, 2022. [57] M. Kazhdan, M. Bolitho, and H. Hoppe, “Poisson surface recon-struction,” in Proceedings of the Fourth Eurographics Symposium on Geometry Processing , SGP ’06, (Goslar, DEU), p. 61–70, Eurographics Association, 2006.