Title: Data-Driven Formal Methods for Complex Dynamical Systems: A Survey

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.27908v1

Published Time: Fri, 31 Jul 2026 00:46:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 51

Markdown Content:
# Data-Driven Formal Methods for Complex Dynamical Systems: A Survey ⋆

# Behrad Samari a, Alessandro Abate b, Antoine Girard c, Majid Zamani d,Amy Nejati a, Abolfazl Lavaei a

> a

School of Computing, Newcastle University, United Kingdom 

> b

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, United Kingdom 

> c

Universit´ e Paris-Saclay, CNRS, CentraleSup´ elec, Laboratoire des signaux et syst` emes, 91190, Gif-sur-Yvette, France 

> d

Department of Computer Science, University of Colorado Boulder, United States 

Abstract 

Data-driven approaches with formal guarantees have recently emerged as a powerful means for the verification and controller synthesis of complex dynamical systems. Interest in these methods is rapidly growing, as system models are often unavailable in practice, and challenges such as nonlinear behavior, uncertainty, and the curse of dimensionality typically render accurate modeling infeasible. These difficulties motivate leveraging limited data collected from the system while still providing formal guarantees on its overall behavior. The community has therefore proposed a few hundred articles on the development of data-driven frameworks that enable the formal verification and synthesis of dynamical systems without explicit models, addressing complex specifications beyond stability. Despite this rapid growth, existing results remain scattered and lack a coherent organization, limiting a clear understanding of their principles, distinctions, and practical potential. This survey fills this gap by providing a comprehensive overview of these data-driven methods for both deterministic and stochastic dynamical systems. We structure the literature around three main methodological pillars in formal methods: (in)finite-abstraction-based techniques, functional certificate approaches, such as control barrier certificates, and compositional methods. For each of these approaches, we classify the resulting data-driven guarantees into three main categories: (i) statistical guarantees grounded in probably approximately correct and scenario-based frameworks, (ii) guarantees derived from Lipschitz continuity, and (iii) guarantees exploiting structural properties, e.g. , data-parameterized system representations or monotonicity. While the literature on deterministic systems is considerably richer, we also devote particular attention to the stochastic counterpart, highlighting the inherent differences and challenges that arise compared to the deterministic case. Throughout the survey, we aim to facilitate the entry of younger researchers into this thriving and diverse field by providing a clear overview of key challenges and solutions while highlighting current limitations and research avenues to guide future developments and community growth. 

Key words: Data-driven control; formal methods; complex deterministic and stochastic systems; (in)finite abstractions; functional certificates; compositional techniques; formal guarantees 

1 Introduction 

Formal verification and controller synthesis for dy-namical systems have become a prominent research direction over the past two decades, driven by their 

⋆ Corresponding author: Behrad Samari 

Email addresses: b.samari2@newcastle.ac.uk (Behrad Samari), alessandro.abate@cs.ox.ac.uk (Alessandro Abate), antoine.girard@centralesupelec.fr (Antoine Girard), majid.zamani@colorado.edu (Majid Zamani), 

amy.nejati@newcastle.ac.uk (Amy Nejati), 

abolfazl.lavaei@newcastle.ac.uk (Abolfazl Lavaei). 

essential role in ensuring the correct and dependable operation of safety-critical systems. These systems arise across a wide range of domains, including aerospace, automotive and transportation, robotics, chemical and industrial processes, critical infrastructure, energy net-works, and healthcare technologies (Dutertre & Stavri-dou 1997, Sun & Hebbale 2005, Coogan et al. 2017, Kress-Gazit et al. 2018, Schwarting et al. 2018, Akram & Niazi 2018). Such systems operate in environments where malfunction or unanticipated behavior can lead to catastrophic consequences, including loss of life, severe injuries, environmental damage, or substantial arXiv:2607.27908v1 [eess.SY] 30 Jul 2026 System Types 

> Deterministic systems
> (Sections 3–5)
> Stochastic systems
> (Sections 6–8)

Mathematical Tools  

> Abstraction-based techniques
> (Sections 3 and 6)
> Infinite abstractions:
> Reduced-order models
> Finite abstractions:
> Symbolic models
> (deterministic systems)
> Finite (interval) Markov decision processes
> (stochastic systems)
> Functional certificates
> (Sections 4 and 7) (Stochastic) control barrier certificates (Stochastic) k-inductive control barrier certificates (Stochastic) closure certificates
> Compositional methods
> (Sections 5 and 8) Small-gain reasoning Dissipativity-based reasoning

Out-of-Sample Performance Guarantees 

> Scenario approach
> (Section 2.1)
> Assumptions:
> i.i.d. data
> Guarantee:
> PAC-style guarantees
> Lipschitz continuity-based approach
> (Section 2.2)
> Assumptions:
> Lipschitz continuous with known Lipschitz constants
> Guarantee:
> Violation-free
> (deterministic systems)
> Probabilistic
> (stochastic systems)
> Structural-property-based approach
> (Section 2.3)
> Assumptions:
> Known system class
> (e.g. , polynomial systems)
> Known system property
> (monotonicity)
> Guarantee:
> Deterministic
> (deterministic systems)
> Probabilistic
> (stochastic systems)

Certified Tasks 

> Verification
> Controller synthesis

Fig. 1. Roadmap of the survey, providing a summary of the considered system types, mathematical tools studied, and primary out-of-sample performance guarantees, collectively leading to formal verification and policy synthesis from data. 

economic disruption (Baier & Katoen 2008, Leveson 2016, McGregor et al. 2017). These risks underscore the growing need for rigorous, mathematically grounded methodologies to ensure both safety and performance in modern autonomous and cyber-physical systems. More-over, modern autonomous systems increasingly require formal guarantees with respect to high-level temporal specifications that go beyond classical notions of sta-bility, e.g. , those expressed as (linear) temporal logic formulae (Pnueli 1977, Baier & Katoen 2008). A com-mon example is the reach-while-avoid task (Summers & Lygeros 2010, Fan et al. 2018), which captures scenar-ios in which an autonomous system, such as a vehicle, should reach a target region while avoiding obstacles along the way. While both verification and controller synthesis provide provable guarantees for such specifications, they differ in scope and usage (Belta et al. 2017). Specifically, given a deterministic dynamical system and a property of in-terest, formal verification aims to rigorously determine whether or not the system satisfies the desired specifi-cation. For stochastic dynamical systems, this task nat-urally extends to computing or tightly characterizing the probability that the system satisfies the specifica-tion. In contrast, a synthesis problem concerns dynam-ical systems with control inputs, where the goal is to formally design a controller (also referred to as a policy or strategy), typically in the form of a state-feedback law, that enforces the desired property. This paradigm is also referred to as correct-by-construction control de-sign, since each step of the synthesis procedure is accom-panied by a formal guarantee. In stochastic settings, this task translates into synthesizing a controller that max-imizes the probability of satisfying the given specifica-tion. Due to their intrinsic soundness, formal-methods-based approaches eliminate the need for costly, exhaus-tive, and potentially unsuccessful post hoc validation of-ten required in safety-critical real-world applications. Despite their advantages, formal verification and con-troller synthesis have typically been developed under the assumption that an accurate mathematical model of the underlying dynamical system is available. In practice, however, such models are often unavailable; when avail-able, they are typically either simplified and therefore incomplete or too complex to be of any effective use. Consequently, classical model-based techniques are of-ten unsuitable for the verification and control design of complex systems with unknown dynamics, making data-driven approaches essential for enabling formal reason-ing in such settings. Within this context, this survey pro-vides a structured overview of data-driven formal verifi-cation and controller synthesis, as illustrated in Fig. 1. 

1.1 Data-Driven Frameworks 

To address the aforementioned challenge, the literature has developed two complementary and well-established data-driven paradigms: indirect and direct approaches (cf. Fig. 2). In indirect methods, the primary objec-tive is to perform model identification so as to con-struct approximate models of unknown dynamical sys-tems (Campi & Weyer 2002, Hjalmarsson 2005, Hou & Wang 2013, Pillonetto et al. 2014, Chiuso & Pillonetto 2019, D¨ orfler et al. 2022). These approaches, includ-ing methods based on model-based reinforcement learn-ing (Recht 2019), neural networks (Zhou et al. 2022), and Gaussian process regression (Lederer et al. 2019), aim to reconstruct system dynamics from data, thereby en-abling the use of classical model-based approaches once a sufficiently accurate model is obtained. Nevertheless, the practical effectiveness of such meth-ods ultimately depends on the accuracy of the under-lying identification procedure. While an active line of research studies the discrepancy between an identified model and the true system dynamics (Oymak & Ozay 2019, Lederer et al. 2019), this mismatch remains dif-ficult to quantify. Moreover, although well-established methods exist for linear model identification, current ap-proaches for nonlinear systems still face notable limita-tions (Kerschen et al. 2006). This constrains the appli-cability of indirect approaches mainly to linear systems 2System data  

> Model identification
> Model-based analysis
> System data
> Model identification
> Data-driven analysis (a) Indirect approach System data
> Model identification
> Model-based analysis
> System data
> Model identification
> Data-driven analysis (b) Direct approach Fig. 2. Conceptual comparison of indirect and direct data– driven approaches. (a) The indirect approach relies on model identification followed by model-based analysis, while (b) the direct approach operates on raw data without an explicit model-identification step.

or to specific classes of nonlinear systems. In addition, indirect approaches inherently involve two-stage work-flows (Haesaert et al. 2017, Sadraddini & Belta 2018), in which a model is first constructed and then employed for model-based techniques, whereas practitioners often prefer end-to-end methods that bypass this intermediate step and its associated complexity (Sznaier et al. 2025). Direct data-driven approaches, in contrast, follow a fun-damentally different paradigm. Rather than construct-ing an explicit model, they bypass the identification step and leverage recorded data directly for formal verifica-tion or controller synthesis of dynamical systems (cf. Fig. 2(b)). This methodology, however, introduces its own challenges. In particular, the finite nature of avail-able data prevents capturing all possible system behav-iors, making it challenging to provide guarantees over both observed and unobserved evolution. Consequently, a central challenge lies in providing out-of-sample per-formance guarantees; that is, formal guarantees, typi-cally in a worst-case or distributional sense, ensuring that conclusions drawn from finite data ( i.e. , limited ob-served scenarios) remain provably valid for unseen data (i.e. , unobserved scenarios). This survey places primary emphasis on direct data-driven approaches. For the sake of completeness, we also review selected indirect data-driven approaches and their associated guarantees that address the formal ver-ification and controller synthesis of complex dynamical systems. To provide a thorough discussion of the under-lying guarantees, we should first introduce the founda-tional tools for formal verification and synthesis consid-ered throughout this survey. 

1.2 Abstraction-Based Techniques 

The first methodology we consider for formal verifi-cation and synthesis of complex dynamical systems is abstraction-based techniques, in which original systems (a.k.a. concrete systems) are approximated by simpler ones of either lower dimensions (infinite abstractions) or finite state spaces (finite abstractions). The main advantage of these approaches is that they provide a rigorous quantification of the mismatch between the behavior of the concrete system and that of its abstrac-tion. Thus, one can conduct the analysis and synthesis over simpler abstractions and subsequently transfer them back to concrete systems with formal correctness guarantees (Reissig et al. 2016, Calbert et al. 2026). As noted above, abstraction-based techniques broadly fall into two categories: (i) infinite abstractions and (ii) 

finite abstractions. In the sequel, we first discuss these approaches in deterministic settings, and then extend the discussion to stochastic frameworks. In the realm of infinite abstractions, also referred to as model order reduction in the control literature (Antoulas 2005, Astolfi 2010), the aim is to alleviate scalability challenges associated with the formal analysis and design of dynamical systems, especially those with rather high dimensions. More precisely, the core idea in this context is to construct a reduced-order model (ROM) with fewer state variables than the concrete system, enabling anal-ysis and policy synthesis on this simpler model, with the results then translated back to the concrete system while quantifying the closeness of the behavior of the two sys-tems. It is important to note that while such method-ologies help address scalability challenges, the resulting ROMs typically retain uncountable state and input sets, which can still lead to computational complexity. To address this issue, finite abstractions, which are also known as symbolic models (Pola & Di Benedetto 2019), provide approximations of either concrete systems or their associated ROMs, which are endowed with fi-nite state sets. Such abstractions (for non-stochastic systems) are broadly divided into complete and sound 

abstractions (Tabuada 2009). Specifically, complete ab-stractions provide necessary and sufficient guarantees, ensuring that a controller satisfies a desired specifica-tion on the abstraction if and only if it does so on the original system. In contrast, sound abstractions offer only sufficient guarantees; thus, failure to synthesize a controller on the abstraction does not preclude its existence for the original system. Given a discretization parameter, a finite abstraction is generally constructed by partitioning the state (and in-put) set so that each discrete state (and input) corre-sponds to a set of continuous states of the underlying system (similarly for the input). Since the resulting ab-stractions are finite in this case, one can directly lever-age a wide range of algorithmic tools from computer sci-ence (Baier & Katoen 2008) to perform model checking or synthesize controllers that optimize performance cri-teria or satisfy complex specifications, including those expressed as temporal logic formulae (Lavaei, Soudjani, 3Data Collection  Reduced-Order Model  Finite Abstraction  

> Lookup table or finite
> memory controller:

Discrete Controller Interface Function Original System Fig. 3. General schematic of data-driven abstraction-based approaches, where symbols associated with the ROM are denoted with a tilde ( e.g. , ˜ x), while those associated with the finite abstraction are indicated using a hat ( e.g. , ˆ x). As depicted, the first step ( 1 ) is to collect data from the system, which can typically be carried out in three main ways, each yielding a distinct type of formal guarantee (cf. Sections 2.1–2.3). Then, a ROM for the original dynamical system is constructed (Step          

> 2) if it is relatively high-dimensional; otherwise, this step can be skipped. Subsequently, for the underlying system, either the original system of low dimensions or the constructed ROM of a high-dimensional original system, a finite abstraction is constructed (Step 3), upon which a discrete controller can be synthesized (Step 4) using tools introduced in the formal methods community (Calbert et al. 2024, Mouelhi et al. 2013, Mathiesen et al. 2024, Mazo Jr et al. 2010, Roy et al. 2011, Wooding & Lavaei 2024 a, van Huijgevoort et al. 2025), satisfying a desired specification of interest. This discrete controller can then be refined back to the underlying system through the so-called interface function (Step 5), ensuring that the underlying system also satisfies the same specification, albeit with a guaranteed error bound (Step 6).

Abate & Zamani 2022). A central component of finite-abstraction methodologies is the establishment of formal guarantees on the state (or output) relation between the concrete system and its abstract model. Such guarantees ensure that verification outcomes or synthesized strate-gies obtained on the abstraction model can be trans-ferred back to the original system. While the general idea of (in)finite abstractions remains the same in both deterministic and stochastic settings, intrinsic differences arise due primarily to the presence of stochasticity in the latter case. In particular, in stochas-tic settings, the mismatch between the behavior of the original system and that of its infinite abstraction can only be guaranteed with a certain probability, which one typically aims to maximize. This implies that the ob-tained ROM preserves the relevant behavioral proper-ties of the concrete stochastic system only with a cer-tain probability. The impact of stochasticity becomes even more pronounced when constructing finite abstrac-tions of dynamical systems. In particular, in stochastic systems, transitions are inherently probabilistic, so that under the same state and input, the successor state may fall into multiple partitions due to the randomness in the dynamics. This is precisely why finite abstractions of stochastic dynamical systems are typically in the form of finite Markov decision processes (MDPs) (Puterman 2014), which are generally described by transition prob-ability matrices. Each entry of such a matrix specifies the probability of transitioning from one partition to an-other, conditioned on the discrete state and applied dis-crete input, while capturing the inherent randomness of the underlying system. Alternatively, when the transi-tion probabilities between partitions lie within specified intervals, finite abstractions can be constructed in the form of interval Markov decision processes (IMDPs) (Gi-van et al. 2000). We note that, if the underlying system has no control input, finite MDPs and IMDPs reduce, respectively, to finite Markov chains (MCs) and interval Markov chains (IMCs). Regardless of whether the interest is to construct infi-nite or finite abstractions, their construction ultimately hinges on precise knowledge of the underlying dynam-ics. Specifically, constructing an infinite abstraction of a concrete system requires knowledge of its model to (i) 

derive its ROM and (ii) formally relate the two systems by quantifying the closeness of their behaviors. Likewise, accurate model knowledge is also required for finite ab-stractions. However, as discussed above, in practice, ac-4γ > η              

> X
> Xu
> B(x)≥γ
> X0
> B(x)≤η
> X: State space
> X0: Initial set
> Xu: Unsafe set
> B: Barrier certificate
> Fig. 4. Illustration of a barrier certificate: The blue dashed ellipse represents the level set B(x) = η, which separates the initial set from the unsafe set .

curate models are often unavailable or too complex to be useful, motivating the development of data-driven abstraction-based approaches for the analysis and policy synthesis of dynamical systems, which typically follow the hierarchy illustrated in Fig. 3. 

1.3 Functional Certificate Techniques 

While constructing ROMs of dynamical systems miti-gates scalability challenges, building finite abstractions of either concrete systems or their associated ROMs still requires the discretization ( i.e. , gridding or partition-ing) of the state and input sets. This leads to the well-known curse of dimensionality, whereby constructing a symbolic model for a dynamical system typically incurs computational complexity that grows exponentially with the state and input dimensions. Motivated by this chal-lenge, the literature has developed functional certificate approaches, such as (control) barrier certificates (Pra-jna & Jadbabaie 2004, Prajna 2006, Prajna et al. 2007, Wieland & Allg¨ ower 2007, Ames et al. 2016, 2019, Luo et al. 2020, Santoyo et al. 2021, Wang et al. 2017, Xiao et al. 2023, Clark 2025, Laurenti & Lahijanian 2026, Di-dier & Zeilinger 2026, Mazouz et al. 2022), k-inductive (control) barrier certificates (Bak 2018, Anand et al. 2021, Hu et al. 2025, Zhi et al. 2024, Lewis et al. 2024), and (control) closure certificates (Murali et al. 2024), which can be employed for formal verification and syn-thesis to enforce diverse complex specifications without requiring state-space discretization. In particular, a barrier certificate is a real-valued func-tion, analogous to a Lyapunov function, defined on the state space of a dynamical system and required to sat-isfy a set of inequalities involving both the function it-self and the dynamics governing the system. If a suit-able level of this function is chosen so that the corre-sponding sublevel set contains the prescribed initial con-ditions and is disjoint from the unsafe region (cf. Fig. 4), the barrier-certificate inequalities ensure safety. In de-terministic settings, trajectories starting from the ini-tial set avoid the unsafe set, while in stochastic settings, the probability of reaching the unsafe set can be suit-ably bounded. While barrier certificates enable system safety verification, control barrier certificates extend this framework to controller-synthesis settings, where the ob-jective is to design a controller that ensures the system state remains within the designated safe region, either deterministically or with a (maximized) quantified prob-ability. We highlight that (control) barrier certificates typically provide sufficient results for nonlinear systems; consequently, if a valid certificate cannot be found, no conclusion can be drawn regarding system safety. It is important to note that the value of a (control) bar-rier certificate is typically required to be non-increasing along system trajectories, either in the deterministic set-ting (cf. Definition 9 with c = 0) or in expectation in the stochastic setting. This requirement may restrict the applicability of (control) barrier certificates in certain scenarios. To mitigate this issue, the literature, build-ing on the notion of k-induction for safety verification of finite-state systems and software programs (Sheeran et al. 2000, De Moura et al. 2003, Donaldson et al. 2011), has introduced k-inductive (control) barrier cer-tificates to relax the standard non-increasing require-ment of (control) barrier certificates (Anand et al. 2021). This approach relaxes the aforementioned constraint by allowing up to k − 1 one-step increases (in expectation in the stochastic setting), each bounded by a prescribed threshold, while requiring the non-increasing property over every k consecutive steps. By allowing such relax-ations, the likelihood of obtaining k-inductive (control) barrier certificates is improved, which in turn increases the chance of being able to conduct formal verification or policy synthesis of dynamical systems where conven-tional (control) barrier certificates fail to exist. Of paramount importance is that while (control) bar-rier certificates are mainly employed for guaranteeing the safety of a dynamical system, they have also been adapted to address richer temporal specifications, in-cluding those described by ω-regular languages (Baier & Katoen 2008, Anand et al. 2024). However, such exten-sions often become conservative since barrier certificates reason only about individual states and their immediate successors. In contrast, ω-regular objectives, such as re-currence, hinge on whether certain states can be visited infinitely often, a question that requires reasoning over the transitive closure of the transition relation rather than over local, one-step behavior. This challenge has led to the development of (control) closure certificates (Mu-rali et al. 2024), which extend (control) barrier certifi-cates from state invariants to transition invariants. More precisely, (control) closure certificates are defined over pairs of states, enabling them to characterize an over-approximation of the transitive closure of the transition relation. In this way, they capture the multi-step reach-ability structure required for reasoning about ω-regular properties. As a result, they offer a more expressive and less conservative foundation for verifying and synthesiz-5Data Collection  Control Barrier Certificate 

Safety Controller Dynamical System          

> Discrete controller or state-feedback
> controller γ > η
> X
> Xu
> B(x)≥γ
> X0
> B(x)≤η
> X: State space
> X0: Initial set
> Xu: Unsafe set
> B: Barrier certificate

Fig. 5. Overall diagram of data-driven functional certificate approaches, illustrated using control barrier certificates as a representative example. Similar to data-driven abstraction-based approaches, the first step ( 1 ) involves collecting data from the system, which can be carried out in three different ways, each associated with distinct formal guarantees (cf. Sections 2.1–2.3). Leveraging the collected data, control barrier certificates are synthesized (Step 2 ), followed by the design of the corresponding safety controllers (Step 3 ), which are then applied to the system (Step 4 ) to ensure safety. 

ing controllers for such specifications. Despite these advantages, a key challenge in adopting functional certificate approaches lies in their reliance on precise knowledge of the underlying dynamics, which is often unavailable in real-world scenarios. This challenge has motivated the development of data-driven functional certificate approaches, whose typical hierarchy is illus-trated in Fig. 5 for the synthesis of control barrier cer-tificates and the corresponding safety controllers. 

1.4 Compositional Techniques 

Both the abstraction-based techniques outlined in Sec-tion 1.2 and the functional certificate approaches dis-cussed in Section 1.3 are primarily well suited to dynam-ical systems of moderate dimensionality. However, an important class of real-world systems comprises large-scale interconnected networks, e.g. , power grids. Regret-tably, constructing (in)finite abstractions and functional certificates for such large-scale networks in a monolithic manner is intractable, primarily due to the high dimen-sionality involved. To address this challenge, a promising approach is to view a large-scale network as an intercon-nection of smaller subsystems. Regarding abstraction-based settings, compositional techniques can then be em-ployed to construct an (in)finite abstraction of the over-all network by first deriving abstractions of the subsys-tems and establishing formal behavioral relations be-tween each subsystem and its abstraction. These sub-system abstractions, along with their relations, are then compositionally combined into a global abstraction of the network, which yields the corresponding global be-havioral relation. On the other hand, to construct functional certificates for large-scale interconnected networks, compositional techniques can likewise be utilized, whereby a global functional certificate (together with a controller) for the entire network is constructed by leveraging subsystem-level certificates (and controllers). We note that compo-sitional techniques are largely founded on small-gain or dissipativity-based reasoning, each of which has tradi-tionally been applied to stability analysis of large-scale interconnected networks (Dashkovskiy et al. 2010, Ar-cak et al. 2016, Mironchenko 2023). While these approaches offer high scalability for han-dling large-dimensional systems, similar to the mono-lithic case, constructing (in)finite abstractions or func-tional certificates using compositional techniques still re-quires precise knowledge of the network dynamics, which is often unavailable, thereby highlighting the need for data-driven counterparts. 

1.5 Data-Driven Formal Guarantees 

As discussed previously, the lack of precise mathemat-ical models for real-world systems, together with the widespread availability of inexpensive sensors enabling extensive data collection, has driven significant interest 6in developing abstraction-based and functional certifi-cate methods that rely on data rather than explicit mod-els. A central challenge in such data-driven approaches, however, is providing out-of-sample performance guar-antees, as mentioned in Section 1.1. Throughout this survey, and across both deterministic and stochastic set-tings, we classify the principal frameworks for address-ing this challenge into three overarching categories. The first comprises statistical guarantees derived via the sce-nario approach or within probably approximately cor-rect (PAC) frameworks. The second includes guarantees based on Lipschitz continuity to relate observed data to unobserved behaviors. The third encompasses guar-antees that exploit structural properties of dynamical systems, such as data-parameterized representations or monotonicity, to infer validity beyond the sampled data. 

Scenario Approach. In the first category, the sur-vey considers the scenario approach (Calafiore & Campi 2006, Campi et al. 2009, Mohajerin Esfahani et al. 2015, Campi & Garatti 2008, 2011, Margellos et al. 2014, Ro-mao et al. 2022, Campi & Garatti 2023, Berger & Jungers 2025), which is a probabilistic framework that provides formal guarantees for optimization and control problems with constraints depending on unknown or uncertain quantities, making it particularly well-suited to settings where system models are not explicitly available. More precisely, in both abstraction-based and functional cer-tificate approaches, the required conditions can be gener-ally formulated as a robust optimization program whose constraints should hold over the uncountable state (and input) set, resulting in infinitely many constraints. More-over, since these constraints also depend on unknown system dynamics, the resulting robust optimization pro-gram becomes intractable. The scenario approach, there-fore, constructs a tractable counterpart of the optimiza-tion problem using a finite number of samples collected from the system, referred to as scenarios. The solution to this sampled problem is then accompanied by a quantifi-able guarantee that, with a prescribed confidence level, the probability of constraint violation on unseen realiza-tions does not exceed a user-specified tolerance. In other words, these probabilistic guarantees are typically ex-pressed in terms of violation and confidence levels, which together formalize the likelihood that the solution re-mains feasible outside the sampled data (cf. Theorem 1). Conceptually, the scenario approach closely aligns with the principles of PAC learning introduced by Valiant (1984), as both frameworks aim to translate empirical observations into out-of-sample performance guarantees with quantifiable statistical confidence. In PAC learn-ing, one seeks solutions that are probably approximately correct, where “probably” denotes the confidence level of the guarantee and “approximately correct” reflects the allowable probability of constraint violation. These two notions are directly analogous to the confidence and violation parameters that characterize the guarantees provided by the scenario approach. Due to this con-ceptual correspondence, guarantees obtained through scenario-based methods in data-driven abstraction-based and functional certificate approaches are often referred to as PAC-style guarantees. It is worth not-ing that related finite-sample probabilistic guarantees have also been developed through conformal prediction ,which has recently been used in formal verification and control to quantify uncertainty, construct prediction regions, design safe controllers, and support offline and online verification of learning-enabled autonomous sys-tems. While standard conformal prediction provides marginal coverage guarantees under exchangeability assumptions, calibration-conditional variants can yield guarantees with a structure close to that of PAC-style guarantees. We refer the interested reader to the recent survey by Lindemann et al. (2025) for more detailed discussions on conformal prediction and its formal guar-antees. 

Lipschitz Continuity-Based Approach. Despite the advantages of data-driven frameworks grounded in the scenario approach, they yield probabilistic correct-ness guarantees even in the deterministic setting. This limitation has motivated the development of alternative frameworks whose guarantees rely on certain Lipschitz continuity conditions. More concretely, frameworks based on the scenario approach typically require the collected data to be independent and identically dis-tributed (i.i.d.); see Fig. 6(a). In contrast, frameworks relying on Lipschitz continuity impose a grid over the state and input spaces, requiring samples that cover each cell, i.e. , by initializing the system at correspond-ing states and inputs and collecting one-step-ahead data (cf. Fig. 6(b)). Once this coverage is ensured, Lipschitz continuity conditions can be invoked to extend the va-lidity of the results from the sampled points within each cell to the entire cell, and consequently to the entire sample space. As a result, in the deterministic set-ting, this procedure yields deterministic out-of-sample guarantees in contrast to the inherently probabilistic guarantees provided by the scenario approach. We note that even when an i.i.d. sampling approach is employed, invoking Lipschitz continuity conditions can eliminate the violation parameter from the guarantee; however, the resulting out-of-sample performance guarantee is then expressed in terms of a confidence level due to the random nature of the sampling process. As discussed above, frameworks based on the scenario approach typically require i.i.d. data, implying that each sample should stem from a distinct, independent trajec-tory of the system. In practice, this may not be viable and is generally undesirable, as it is time-consuming, costly, and operationally disruptive. Approaches based on Lipschitz continuity do not alleviate this limitation; in fact, they typically require even more samples due to the grid-based sampling, which makes the sample com-plexity grow exponentially with the dimension of the sampling space. Consequently, both approaches are pri-7x

> x+
> (a) Scenario approach
> x
> x+
> (b) Lipschitz continuity-based ap-proach

x1

x2

x3    

> (c) Structural-property-based method (data-parameterized system representation) Fig. 6. Schematic illustration of three main data collection approaches associated with the data-driven frameworks providing formal out-of-sample performance guarantees considered in this survey. As shown in Fig. 6(a), leveraging the scenario approach and its guarantees requires i.i.d. sampling, whereas approaches based on Lipschitz continuity may utilize grid-based data collection to ensure coverage and provide guarantees (without violation and confidence parameters in deterministic settings), as illustrated in Fig. 6(b). In particular, the vertical gray lines in Fig. 6(b), which discretize the horizontal axis, indicate the discrete set of states at which the system is initialized for data collection, corresponding to the centers of the grid cells induced by the Lipschitz continuity-based framework. For each fixed initial state x, multiple successor states x+(vertical axis in Fig. 6(b)) can be observed since the system is repeatedly initialized at the same grid point under distinct control inputs, yielding different successor states. Fig. 6(c) illustrates methods that derive data-parameterized system representations, typically relying on a single time-series dataset collected from the system.

marily suited to simulator-based settings, where gener-ating multiple independent runs is feasible. 

Structural-Property-Based Approach. The above-mentioned challenges have led to growing interest in data-driven frameworks that provide formal guarantees while exploiting structural properties of the system to potentially reduce sample complexity. As a subcategory of these frameworks, recent data-driven methodologies leverage data-parameterized system representations. Specifically, inspired by Willems et al.’s fundamen-tal lemma (Willems et al. 2005) (see also the studies by Markovsky & D¨ orfler (2021), van Waarde, De Per-sis, Camlibel & Tesi (2020), Shakouri et al. (2025)) and subsequent developments in stability analysis and con-troller design (Berberich et al. 2020, De Persis & Tesi 2019, van Waarde, Camlibel & Mesbahi 2020, Bisoffi et al. 2022, Rotulo et al. 2022, van Waarde, Eising, Trentelman & Camlibel 2020, van Waarde et al. 2023, De Persis et al. 2023, Monshizadeh et al. 2026, Li et al. 2026, Zaker, Angeli & Lavaei 2025, Bianchi et al. 2025, Dai & Sznaier 2021, Eising et al. 2025), a complemen-tary line of direct data-driven approaches has emerged that often requires only data from a single system tra-jectory, thereby significantly simplifying data collection (cf. Fig. 6(c)). More concretely, these approaches typically require a single set of non-i.i.d. time-series data collected from the system during a finite-time experiment. Subsequently, if the data is sufficiently rich, typically characterized by a rank condition on the collected data (cf. Assumption 1), it contains adequate information about the system, en-abling the development of data-driven abstraction-based and functional certificate approaches with formal out-of-sample performance guarantees. These methodolo-gies provide deterministic formal guarantees for non-stochastic systems, similar in spirit to approaches based on Lipschitz continuity, while requiring substantially less data by exploiting system structural properties. Another important structural property that can facili-tate the development of data-driven methods is mono-tonicity . In broad terms, a monotone system preserves a partial order along its trajectories: if two initial condi-tions are ordered, then the associated trajectories remain ordered for all future times (Angeli & Sontag 2003). In the linear case, such systems are commonly referred to as positive systems (Sadraddini & Belta 2019, Kawano et al. 2020). The importance of this property lies in the additional structure it imposes on system behavior, which typically facilitates analysis based on comparison principles, extremal trajectories, and interval bounds. Consequently, monotonicity enables reasoning based on order relations rather than unstructured exploration, thereby reducing conservatism and improving scala-bility in data-driven settings. To be more precise, in data-driven settings, this feature is particularly valuable as it allows sparse observations to be exploited more effectively and can omit the dependence on stronger assumptions commonly used to obtain formal out-of-sample guarantees; for instance, for certain classes of order-preserving systems and order-compatible specifi-cations, monotonicity can reduce or eliminate the need for Lipschitz-type assumptions. It is worth noting that monotone systems arise in a wide range of applica-tion domains, including biological systems (Klipp et al. 2005), chemical reaction systems (Leenheer et al. 2007), and transportation networks (Kim et al. 2016). 81.6 Contributions and Organization of the Survey 

To the best of our knowledge, this is the first survey that systematically organizes data-driven formal verification and synthesis for dynamical systems through the com-bined lenses of abstraction-based approaches, functional certificates, compositional techniques, and formal out-of-sample guarantees. The survey strives for comprehen-siveness while focusing on key developments and situat-ing related methodologies within dedicated sections that provide additional technical detail. Beyond curating the relevant contributions, the survey is structured to help newcomers to the field understand and navigate the key challenges and solutions in this rapidly evolving field. The relevant literature is examined through the lenses of abstraction-based and functional certificate approaches, encompassing both monolithic and compositional man-ners, applied to both deterministic and stochastic set-tings (cf. Fig. 1). The resulting data-driven formal guar-antees are grouped into three categories: (i) statisti-cal guarantees based on PAC and scenario-based frame-works, (ii) guarantees derived from Lipschitz continu-ity, and (iii) guarantees exploiting structural properties, 

e.g. , data-parameterized representations or monotonic-ity. Throughout the survey, several research avenues are raised, thereby paving the way for future advances. We remark that while recent survey papers by Mar-tin et al. (2023) and De Persis & Tesi (2023) overview data-driven guarantees for nonlinear dynamical sys-tems, their main emphasis is on stability analysis and designing stabilizing controllers from data, employing approaches such as polynomial approximations, kernel methods, Koopman operator techniques, and feedback linearization. This survey, however, differs in two fun-damental aspects. First, the mathematical tools we consider here, e.g. , finite and infinite abstractions, as well as functional certificates, are capable of addressing complex properties beyond stability (Lavaei, Soudjani, Abate & Zamani 2022), including those expressed as lin-ear temporal logic (LTL) formulae (Pnueli 1977, Baier & Katoen 2008). Second, while Martin et al. (2023) and De Persis & Tesi (2023) study only deterministic systems, we consider both deterministic and stochastic settings. These two distinctions necessitate the explo-ration of different methodologies and frameworks; ac-cordingly, this survey expands the scope of data-driven control with formal guarantees. It is worth emphasizing that, while the literature con-tains many studies that assume known system dynam-ics while using data such as neural-network-based ver-ification and synthesis (Lopez et al. 2025), this survey focuses on settings where the dynamics are (partially) unknown, in line with Section 1.1 and practical applica-tion requirements. Furthermore, we note that a substan-tial body of work has addressed data-driven reachability analysis, where reachable sets are computed from data as over-approximations of all possible system trajecto-ries. Such reachable-set constructions can subsequently be used for several objectives, including, but not limited to, safety verification, the synthesis of safety controllers, and control design under signal temporal logic specifi-cations. While promising, data-driven numerical tech-niques whose primary objective is to compute possibly tight over-approximations of reachable sets fall outside the scope of this survey and are not reviewed here, un-less they are explicitly used for abstraction construction, controller synthesis, or certificate synthesis. This exclu-sion does not imply that reachability concepts are ab-sent from the discussion; indeed, sublevel sets of barrier certificates can naturally provide over-approximations of reachable sets and play an important role in many verifi-cation frameworks. Nevertheless, given the breadth and maturity of data-driven numerical reachability methods, we believe they are more appropriately covered in a ded-icated survey. The survey paper is organized as follows. To facilitate navigation and provide a general overview of the sur-vey, we note that readers primarily interested in formal guarantee mechanisms may focus on Section 2, while those interested in deterministic and stochastic systems may proceed directly to Sections 3–5 and Sections 6–8, respectively. In more detail, Section 2 presents the main notations and preliminaries employed throughout the survey, along with formal out-of-sample performance guarantees considered in the paper. Section 3 is allocated to discussing data-driven abstraction-based techniques for deterministic systems, covering both infinite and fi-nite abstractions. To complement these methodologies, in Section 4, we present different data-driven functional certificate approaches for deterministic systems, which do not require discretizing state (and input) spaces. The data-driven approaches outlined in Sections 3 and 4 are specifically tailored to monolithic systems and do not scale well to large-scale interconnected networks. To ad-dress this, Section 5 provides an overview of data-driven compositional techniques for both abstraction-based and functional certificate approaches. While deterministic systems are widely applicable, safety-critical systems often exhibit stochastic dynam-ics, adding complexity to their formal analysis. To cover this, in Section 6, we provide a comprehensive overview of data-driven abstraction-based techniques for stochas-tic dynamical systems. Section 7 is dedicated to comple-menting the preceding section by discussing data-driven functional certificate approaches for stochastic systems. Akin to the deterministic setting, Section 8 is allocated to surveying the literature on data-driven compositional techniques, encapsulating both abstraction-based and functional certificate methodologies. Finally, the survey paper is concluded in Section 9. 92 Notations and Preliminaries 

We employ the following notation throughout the survey. We denote by R the set of real numbers, whereas R≥0

and R>0 represent the sets of non-negative and positive real numbers, respectively. Moreover, the sets of non-negative and positive integers are, respectively, given by 

N = {0, 1, 2, . . . } and N≥1 = {1, 2, . . . }. The empty set is represented by ∅. The identity matrix of size n × n is denoted by In, while 𝟘 n represents the zero vector of di-mension n. Given vectors xi ∈ Rni for i ∈ { 1, . . . , N },we define the stacked vector x := [ x1; . . . ; xN ] as their vertical concatenation, yielding a column vector of di-mension PNi=1 ni. For any ¯ p, ¯w ∈ Rn and relational op-erator ≃∈ {≤ , <, =, >, ≥} , where ¯ p = [ p1; . . . ; pn] and ¯w = [ w1; . . . ; wn], ¯p ≃ ¯w is interpreted as pl ≃ wl for ev-ery l ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , n }, i.e. , component-wise comparison. Assuming ¯ p < ¯w, then the compact hyper-interval [¯ p, ¯w]is given as [ p1, w 1] × · · · × [pn, w n]. Furthermore, given 

c = [ c1; . . . ; cn] ∈ Rn, we define the sum ⊕ as c ⊕[¯ p, ¯w] := [p1 + c1, c 1 + w1] × · · · × [pn + cn, c n + wn]. Notation 

|c| implies the entry-wise absolute value of c ∈ Rn, i.e. ,[|c1|; . . . ; |cn|]. Moreover, [ x1 . . . x N ] and [ A1 . . . A N ]represent the horizontal stacking of vectors xi ∈ Rn and matrices Ai ∈ Rn×mi for i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, respectively, forming matrices of sizes n×N and n×PNi=1 mi. Given a 

symmetric matrix P , we write P ≻ 0 ( P ⪰ 0) to denote that P is positive (semi)definite, and P ≺ 0 ( P ⪯ 0) to denote that P is negative (semi)definite. For a matrix A

of arbitrary dimensions, its transpose is denoted by A⊤.The Euclidean norm of a vector x ∈ Rn is represented by ∥x∥ := √x⊤x. The rank of a matrix P is denoted by rank( P ). The Cartesian product of a collection of sets Xi, with 

i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, is denoted by QNi=1 Xi. For two sets X

and Y , a relation R ⊆ X × Y is defined as a subset of their Cartesian product, where an element x ∈ X is said to be related to an element y ∈ Y if ( x, y ) ∈ R;this is equivalently written as xRy. Given the sets X

and Y , their relative complement is denoted by X\Y .The union among the sets Xi, with i ∈ { 1, . . . , n x}, is represented as ∪iXi. We denote the indicator function of a subset A of a set X by 1A : X → { 0, 1}, where 

1A(x) = 1 if and only if x ∈ A , and 1A(x) = 0 oth-erwise. Given three sets X, Y , and Z, and functions 

f : X → Y and g : Y → Z, the composition of f and g

is denoted by g ◦ f : X → Z. For a function f : X → X,we denote by f n, with n ∈ N, the nth iterate of f , de-fined recursively by f 0 := id X and f n := f n−1 ◦ f for 

n ≥ 1, where id X represents the identity mapping on 

X. A block-diagonal matrix with diagonal blocks Ai,

i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, is denoted by blkdiag (A1, . . . , A N ). For a system Sg and a property ∆, the notation Sg ⊨ ∆ sig-nifies that Sg satisfies ∆. For a function f : N → Rn, we define ∥f ∥∞ := sup k∈N ∥f (k)∥. The regularized incom-plete beta function (Calafiore 2010) is defined as 

I : ( c, a, b ) 7 → I(c, a, b ) = 

R c 

> 0

ta−1(1 −t)b−1dt 

R 10 ta−1(1 −t)b−1dt , ∀a, b, c ∈ R>0.

We consider the probability space (Ω , FΩ, PΩ), where Ω denotes the underlying sample space, FΩ is a sigma-algebra on Ω including subsets of Ω as events, and PΩ is the probability measure assigning probabilities to those events. We assume that random variables introduced in the survey are measurable functions of the form X :(Ω , FΩ) → (SX , FX ) such that each random variable 

X induces a probability measure on its space ( SX , FX ). We directly specify probability measures on ( SX , FX )without explicitly referring to the underlying probability space or the mapping X. A topological space S is said to be a Borel space if it is homeomorphic to a Borel subset of a Polish space, i.e. , a separable and completely metrizable space. A Borel sigma algebra is denoted by 

B(S), and can be generated from any Borel space S.The map f : S → Y is measurable whenever it is Borel measurable. To avoid ambiguity, we distinguish between two uses of probability throughout the survey. First, for stochas-tic dynamical systems, probability is induced by the randomness in the system’s evolution, such as process noise or random transitions, and therefore character-izes the distribution of trajectories. Under this trajec-tory distribution, one can then quantify the probabil-ity that the system satisfies a desired specification. Sec-ond, in data-driven approaches that provide probabilis-tic out-of-sample performance guarantees ( e.g. , PAC-style guarantees in Section 2.1), probability hinges on the randomly sampled data used to construct the solu-tion; the corresponding probabilistic guarantee quanti-fies the probability with which the statement inferred from finite samples remains valid for unseen realizations. 

2.1 Scenario Approach: Procedures and Guarantees 

As a substantial body of the literature on data-driven formal verification and policy synthesis relies on the scenario approach and its extensions, we begin by re-viewing this methodology and the associated formal out-of-sample performance guarantees. Broadly speak-ing, many problems in systems and control, including those in abstraction-based frameworks and functional certificate-based methods, can be formulated as robust optimization programs, often convex, where constraints are required to hold over a prescribed set. Such a robust convex program (RCP) is typically of the form min [μ; d] μ (1a) s.t. h(x, d ) ≤ μ, ∀x ∈ X, (1b) 

d = [ d1; d2; . . . ; dv] ∈ Rv, μ ∈ R,

10 where d denotes the vector of decision variables, μ is an auxiliary scalar variable to be minimized, and, for each fixed x ∈ X, h(x, ·) is assumed to be convex in d. More-over, x ∈ X denotes the state vector, where X ⊂ Rn is the state set. We denote by μ∗ 

> RCP

the optimal value of the RCP in (1), and by d∗ 

> RCP

its corresponding optimizer. Importantly, h(x, d ) in (1b) can encode the constraints associated with the construction of either (in)finite ab-stractions or functional certificates. We note that the specific forms of h(x, d ) for abstraction-based and func-tional certificate approaches are provided in their respec-tive sections, and here we keep the discussion general for clarity. It is evident that solving the RCP (1) is, in general, in-tractable, primarily for two reasons. First, h(x, d ) incor-porates the unknown system dynamics, as it encodes the underlying conditions for constructing either abstrac-tions or functional certificates. Second, since the state set X is uncountable, the problem involves infinitely many constraints. This is precisely where the scenario approach plays a crucial role in addressing the problem by concentrating attention on N i.i.d. samples drawn from X, denoted by xzi for i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, each of which is referred to as a scenario (cf. Fig. 6(a)). Subsequently, rather than focusing on the RCP (1), based on the ex-tracted samples xzi ∈ X for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, one can consider the scenario convex program (SCP) min [μ; d] μ (2a) s.t. h(xzi , d ) ≤ μ, ∀xzi ∈ X, ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, (2b) 

d = [ d1; d2; . . . ; dv] ∈ Rv, μ ∈ R,

which constitutes a scenario-based counterpart of the RCP (1). We denote by μ∗ 

> SCP

the optimal value of the SCP (2), and by d∗ 

> SCP

its corresponding optimizer. Unlike the RCP (1), the SCP (2) avoids the two afore-mentioned difficulties, as it involves only finitely many constraints and allows the unknown dynamics in these constraints to be replaced by quantities inferred from data. However, to provide out-of-sample performance guarantees, a key question remains: if the SCP (2) is solved in place of the RCP (1), what can be claimed about the satisfaction (or violation) of the remaining constraints associated with unseen realizations ( i.e. ,those not enforced during optimization)? We present the following theorem, which addresses this crucial question (Campi & Garatti 2008). 

Theorem 1 For a chosen violation parameter ε1 ∈

(0 , 1] and confidence parameter ε2 ∈ (0 , 1] , if N ≥

N (ε1, ε 2), where 

N (ε1, ε 2) := min 

n

N ∈ N≥1

> v

X

> i=0

Ni



εi

> 1

(1 − ε1)N −i ≤ ε2

o

,

(3) 

and the SCP (2) has v + 1 optimization variables, then the solution [μ∗

> SCP

; d∗

> SCP

] satisfies the constraints over X

with violation probability at most ε1 and confidence at least 1 − ε2, i.e., 

P



P h(x, d ∗

> SCP

) > μ ∗

> SCP

 ≤ ε1



≥ 1 − ε2. (4) 

Remark 1 As shown by Campi et al. (2009), a simpler expression than that in (3) is given by 

N (ε1, ε 2) := min 

n

N ∈ N≥1 N ≥ 2

ε1

 ln( 1

ε2

) + v + 1 o

.

This expression shows that the required number of sce-narios depends logarithmically on the confidence param-eter ε2 and linearly on ε−11 . Consequently, ε2 can be cho-sen to be very small (e.g., 10 −10 ) without significantly increasing the required sample size. 

We proceed with providing insight into Theorem 1, first regarding the violation and confidence parameters, and then its connection to the principle of PAC learning. In broad terms, the parameters ε1 and ε2 play com-plementary roles in quantifying the probabilistic nature of the scenario-based guarantee. Specifically, the viola-tion parameter ε1, also referred to as a risk parameter, quantifies the fraction of the state space X over which constraint violations are tolerated, i.e. , where the con-straint (1b) may not be satisfied. The confidence param-eter ε2, on the other hand, reflects the reliability of this risk bound by quantifying the probability that, due to the randomness in the finite sampling process, the ac-tual violation probability exceeds ε1. Equivalently, with confidence at least 1 − ε2, the solution obtained from the SCP (2) exhibits a violation probability no greater than 

ε1 when evaluated on unseen realizations. Moreover, through the parameters ε1 and ε2, the prob-abilistic guarantee in Theorem 1 admits a natural inter-pretation within the framework of PAC learning. More precisely, the parameter ε1 plays the role of an accuracy (or violation) level, while ε2 quantifies the confidence with which this accuracy guarantee holds. This result is distribution-free in the sense that the guarantee does not depend on the underlying probability measure on 

X, and the sample complexity bound depends only on the desired accuracy, the confidence level, and the num-ber of optimization variables. Accordingly, the scenario-based guarantee in Theorem 1 can be interpreted as a PAC-style generalization bound for constraint satisfac-tion, ensuring that a solution learned from finite samples extends to unseen realizations with high probability. 

Remark 2 For brevity, the formulation considered here assumes that the constraint function depends only on the state variable x and the design variables d. When the con-straint additionally depends on the control input u ∈ U ,where U ⊂ Rm denotes the input set, the scenario-based 

11 framework can be extended accordingly, with the required modifications depending on the controller structure (e.g., whether the control input takes values only from a finite input set or is generated by a state-feedback law). 

Despite the advantages offered by the scenario ap-proach, its formal out-of-sample performance guarantee involves two nested probability layers, the inner of which (i.e. , violation or risk) can be undesirable in certain safety-critical applications. Specifically, the inner prob-ability layer, associated with the violation parameter, only ensures constraint satisfaction for most realiza-tions, rather than over the entire state space X. As a result, rare yet potentially critical constraint violations cannot be excluded, which may not be acceptable in practice. This motivates the development of alternative guarantees that bypass, at least, the inner probabilistic layer and establish a more direct connection between the solution of the SCP (2) and that of the correspond-ing RCP (1). In this context, approaches that exploit Lipschitz continuity conditions provide a natural alter-native and form the basis of the guarantee presented in the following subsection. 

2.2 Lipschitz Continuity-Based Approach: Procedures and Guarantees 

Approaches based on Lipschitz continuity assumptions for deriving out-of-sample performance guarantees es-tablish a direct link between the feasibility of the RCP (1) and the solution of the SCP (2). Depending on the data collection procedure, this link may be deter-ministic, requiring no confidence parameter, or proba-bilistic, involving a confidence level. In either case, such guarantees provide a stronger notion of reliability when compared to the PAC-style guarantee in (4). In particu-lar, the guarantee in (4) inherently allows for constraint violations, as quantified by the violation parameter ε1.Indeed, as is evident from Remark 1, achieving ε1 → 0requires N → ∞. Accordingly, within the scenario-based framework discussed in Section 2.1, complete avoidance of constraint violation cannot be guaranteed when only finitely many samples are available. To overcome this limitation, approaches based on Lips-chitz continuity are instrumental in enabling violation-free guarantees, even with finitely many samples. To elaborate on these approaches, let us reconsider the RCP in (1), which may be viewed as a formulation aimed at enforcing h(x, d ) ≤ 0 over the state set X through the minimization of the auxiliary scalar μ; this objec-tive is achieved whenever μ∗ 

> RCP

≤ 0. To proceed with approaches that rely on Lipschitz continuity conditions, one can collect data using the i.i.d. sampling employed in Section 2.1. Alternatively, one may collect N samples 

xzi ∈ X, i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, and consider a ball Bi of ra-dius ϱ ∈ R>0 around each sampled point xzi such that 

X ⊆ ∪ iBi and 

∥x − xzi ∥ ≤ ϱ, ∀x ∈ Bi, ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, (5) where ϱ denotes the covering radius induced by the collected samples and plays a key role in establishing violation-free guarantees (Nejati & Zamani 2023). For simplicity, we refer to this type of data collection as 

grid-based sampling hereafter. With the collected data, irrespective of the data collection procedure employed, one can reconstruct the SCP in (2). The central assumption underpinning the derivation of a formal violation-free guarantee in this framework is that the function h(x, d ) is Lipschitz continuous with respect to the state variable x, with Lipschitz constant L . Since the analysis is carried out over a compact domain X,the existence of such a constant is guaranteed whenever 

h(x, d ) is locally Lipschitz in x. This regularity assump-tion effectively accounts for state realizations that are not explicitly observed during the data collection pro-cess. Under the aforementioned Lipschitz continuity as-sumption, it becomes possible to establish a violation-free out-of-sample performance guarantee, which is for-malized in the following theorem, adapted from the con-tributions of Nejati, Lavaei, Jagtap, Soudjani & Zamani (2023) and Nejati & Zamani (2023). 

Theorem 2 Let the SCP (2) be solved using N ∈ N≥1

collected samples, with the optimal value of μ∗ 

> SCP

and solution d∗ 

> SCP

= [ d∗

> 1

; d∗

> 2

; . . . ; d∗

> v

].

• If the data are collected under the i.i.d. sampling scheme, then for an a priori chosen confidence pa-rameter ε2 ∈ (0 , 1] , the following statement holds with confidence at least 1 − ε2: if 

μ∗ 

> SCP

+ L κ−1(ι) ≤ 0, (6) 

with 

ι ≥ I−1(1 − ε2, v + 1 , N − v) ,

where I−1 denotes the inverse of the regularized incom-plete beta function (Calafiore 2010) with respect to its first argument (i.e., 1−ε2), and κ : R≥0 → [0 , 1] , which depends on the sampling distribution and the geome-try of the uncertainty set X (Nejati, Lavaei, Jagtap, Soudjani & Zamani 2023, Remarks 5.4 and 5.5), then 

h(x, d ∗

> SCP

) ≤ 0, ∀x ∈ X. (7) 

• If the data are collected under the grid-based sampling scheme, and if 

μ∗ 

> SCP

+ L ϱ ≤ 0, (8) 

with ϱ as in (5) , then (7) holds. 

12 We now present two remarks on Theorem 2. First, both guarantees in the theorem are violation-free. In the first case, the guarantee is still associated with a confidence parameter, arising primarily from the use of i.i.d. sam-pling, whereas in the second case, no confidence param-eter appears and the resulting guarantee is determinis-tic. Second, both conditions (6) and (8) should be ver-ified a posteriori. More precisely, one should first solve the SCP (2) and then check whether (6) or (8) is satis-fied. This stands in contrast to the approach described in Section 2.1, which does not require any a posteriori verification. While promising, both the Lipschitz continuity-based approaches discussed in this section and the PAC-style approaches presented in Section 2.1 require repeated sys-tem initializations and corresponding data collection; re-call that the function h(x, d ) explicitly depends on the system dynamics. In practice, however, this requirement can be both challenging and time-consuming, motivat-ing the development of alternative methodologies that exploit system structural properties to alleviate these challenges; such approaches are the focus of the subse-quent subsection. 

2.3 Structural Property-Based Approaches: Procedures and Guarantees 

In the frameworks discussed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, the problem of interest is formulated as an optimization program, where h(x, d ) encapsulates constraints aris-ing from the construction of either (in)finite abstrac-tions or functional certificates. As discussed, solving the scenario-based counterpart of the optimization program requires collecting samples at which h(x, d ) is evalu-ated. Since h(x, d ) depends on the dynamics, this en-tails initializing the system at each sampled state, let-ting it evolve, and recording the resulting state. From this perspective, no explicit knowledge of system struc-tural properties is required, such as whether the dynam-ics are linear or nonlinear, the specific form of nonlinear-ities, whether the system is input-affine, or whether it is monotone. Instead, it suffices to be able to evaluate the system dynamics starting from prescribed initial states. In contrast, the data-driven approaches to be discussed in this subsection assume that certain structural proper-ties of the system are known a priori, which proves ben-eficial in certain aspects. For instance, one key benefit of approaches that exploit system structural properties lies in simplifying the data collection procedure. Specif-ically, approaches based on (generalizations of) Willems et al.’s fundamental lemma (Willems et al. 2005), viewed here as a subcategory of frameworks that exploit sys-tem structural properties, often require only a single set of non-i.i.d. time-series data collected during a finite-time experiment. Based on the collected data, the sys-tem dynamics can be equivalently represented in a data-parameterized form; consequently, this representation is incorporated into the constraints arising from the con-struction of (in)finite abstractions or functional certifi-cates, rather than the unknown dynamics themselves. The satisfaction of these constraints can then be ex-plored via suitable data-driven feasibility conditions. For ease of exposition and to facilitate a clearer illustration of the mechanism of such data-driven approaches, we re-strict our attention here to simple discrete-time linear dynamical systems, which are formally defined below. 

Definition 1 A discrete-time linear time-invariant sys-tem Sl evolves according to 

Sl : x+ = Ax + Bu, (9) 

where x+ denotes the state vector at the next time step, i.e., x+ := x(k + 1) for k ∈ N. The matrices A ∈ Rn×n

and B ∈ Rn×m are the unknown system matrices, while 

x ∈ X and u ∈ U denote the state and control input, respectively, with X ⊂ Rn and U ⊂ Rm representing the compact state and input sets. For a given initial condition 

x0 := x(0) ∈ X and an input sequence u : N → U 1 , the state reached at discrete time instant k ∈ N is denoted by xx0u(k). It is assumed that all state variables of Sl are directly measurable. 

Considering the system Sl, we now illustrate how the dy-namics in (9) can be parameterized using data collected along a single trajectory of the system. Specifically, as-suming direct measurability of all system states and in-puts, one can perform a finite-horizon experiment on the system over the interval [0 , T ], where T ∈ N≥1 denotes the experiment horizon, and collect input–state data 

O := 

h

x(0) x(1) . . . x(T − 1) 

i

∈ Rn×T , (10a) 

I := 

h

u(0) u(1) . . . u(T − 1) 

i

∈ Rm×T , (10b) 

O+ := 

h

x(1) x(2) . . . x(T )

i

∈ Rn×T , (10c) which we refer to as a single trajectory. Assuming that the samples in (10) are noise-free, it follows directly that 

O+ = AO + BI =

> unknown

z }| {h

A B

i "OI

#

.

This observation motivates the idea of parameterizing the closed-loop counterpart of the dynamics in (9) using the collected data in (10). To enable such a parameter-ization, however, the following key assumption is typi-cally required.           

> 1The symbol uis used to denote both an input value in
> Uand an input sequence u:N→U; the intended meaning will be clear from the context. We adopt the same notational convention elsewhere.

13 Assumption 1 It is assumed that the matrix 

h

O⊤ I⊤

i⊤

has full row rank, i.e., 

rank 

"OI

#! 

= n + m. (11) Assumption 1 is, in essence, a data richness condition ensuring that the collected data are sufficiently informa-tive to characterize the system dynamics in a data-driven manner. Under this assumption, which is closely related to the notion of persistency of excitation (Willems et al. 2005), it is essentially guaranteed that the applied in-put sequence sufficiently excites all modes of the system. Closely related discussions on persistently exciting sig-nals can be found, for instance, in the studies by Ver-haegen & Verdult (2007), Padoan et al. (2017), Alsalti et al. (2023) and the references therein. We note that, for (11) to be potentially satisfied, the experiment hori-zon T should at least fulfill T ≥ n + m; in practice, however, T may need to be chosen sufficiently large to ensure that (11) holds. Having stated the required rank condition on the data matrices, we now present a theorem that parameterizes the system dynamics using the data in (10), thereby providing a data-driven representation of the closed-loop dynamics (De Persis & Tesi 2019). 

Theorem 3 Consider the system Sl in Definition 1, and suppose that Assumption 1 holds. Then, under the state-feedback control law u = Kx, with K := IG, and G ∈

RT × n satisfying 

In = OG, 

the system Sl in (9) admits the following data-based closed-loop representation: 

x+ = O+Gx. (12) We now present several remarks on Theorem 3 and its associated formal guarantee. First, it is evident that the discussed approach relies on knowledge of certain struc-tural properties of the system ( e.g. , that the system 

Sl has linear dynamics). Indeed, systems with different structures admit different data-based closed-loop rep-resentations, which should be derived accordingly. For instance, if the system of interest were an input-affine nonlinear system with polynomial dynamics, then a dif-ferent data-based closed-loop representation would be obtained (cf. Theorem 8). This contrasts with the data-driven approaches discussed in the previous subsections, which do not require such prior structural knowledge and can therefore be applied more broadly when this in-formation is unavailable. Second, if the collected data are corrupted by noise, it is still possible to derive a closed-loop parametrization, albeit with suitable modi-fications to account for the presence of noise. Third, and most importantly, it is essential to observe that the data-based closed-loop representation in (12) is equivalent to the closed-loop dynamics in (9) under u = Kx. Conse-quently, if the constraints induced by the construction of either (in)finite abstractions or functional certificates are satisfied when expressed in terms of the data-based parameterization (12), then these constraints are also guaranteed to hold for the original closed-loop system in (9). We also note that the nature of this formal guar-antee, deterministic or probabilistic, depends on the un-derlying system dynamics (non-stochastic or stochastic) and, in the presence of noise in the collected data, on whether the data are affected by unknown-but-bounded noise with known bounds or by stochastic noise with a probabilistic distribution. As mentioned in Section 1.5, another structural prop-erty that can facilitate the development of data-driven approaches is monotonicity. It is important to emphasize that monotonicity can not only facilitate analysis and design by imposing additional structure on system be-havior but can also be integrated into other data-driven frameworks, where it may help reduce conservatism and, depending on the method, lower the required sample complexity. 

Remark 3 The three classes of data-driven guarantees reviewed in this section should be viewed as complemen-tary frameworks, differing mainly in their data require-ments, prior knowledge assumptions, and strength of the resulting out-of-sample performance guarantees. In par-ticular, the scenario approach in Section 2.1 is the most flexible in terms of system knowledge, since it does not require an explicit model or a prescribed structural prop-erty of the dynamics. It is therefore suitable when i.i.d. samples can be generated, particularly in simulator-based settings, and when a small probability of constraint viola-tion is acceptable. While promising, its main limitation is that the resulting guarantee is PAC-style even in deter-ministic settings; it holds up to prescribed violation and confidence levels rather than certifying violation-free cor-rectness. The Lipschitz continuity-based approach in Sec-tion 2.2 is more appropriate when such violations cannot be tolerated, provided that valid Lipschitz constants and sufficient sample coverage are available. In deterministic settings, this can yield violation-free guarantees, but at the price of exponential sample complexity with respect to the dimensionality of the sampling space (in both i.i.d. and grid-based sampling). In contrast, the structural-property-based approaches in Section 2.3 are preferable when reliable prior knowledge about the system class or qualitative properties (e.g., monotonicity) is available. These methods are less general, but when the required structural assumptions are satisfied, they offer substan-tial advantages, such as reducing the data-collection bur-den while still providing deterministic out-of-sample per-

14 formance guarantees in deterministic settings. 

Having reviewed the main data-driven techniques and the formal guarantees they provide, we now turn to a comprehensive overview of data-driven abstraction-based methods for deterministic dynamical systems, with particular emphasis on the challenges involved in their development and on how the previously reviewed techniques can be leveraged to address them. 

3 Deterministic Setting: Data-Driven Abstraction-Based Approaches 

In this section, we provide a comprehensive review of data-driven abstraction-based methodologies, specifi-cally tailored to deterministic dynamical systems. As discussed in Section 1.2, abstraction-based techniques can be broadly categorized into infinite and finite ab-stractions, which we cover in separate subsections. 

3.1 Infinite Abstractions 

Within the context of infinite abstractions, the primary objective is to approximate original ( a.k.a. concrete) dy-namical systems by simpler lower-dimensional models, 

i.e. , reduced-order models (ROMs); see Step 2 in Fig. 3. Such approaches have proven particularly beneficial as the mismatch between the behavior of a concrete system and that of its ROM can be rigorously quantified. This, in turn, enables analysis or controller design to be carried out on the ROM, thereby improving scalability, while still allowing the obtained results to be formally trans-ferred to the concrete system. Specifically, this paradigm is particularly advantageous for synthesizing controllers for high-dimensional systems to satisfy complex specifi-cations, as it enables the use of formal methods tools on the ROM to design controllers that guarantee the satis-faction of the desired specifications. The resulting con-troller can then be refined to the concrete system via an interface function, ensuring that the specification is satisfied by the original system as well, albeit up to a quantified error bound. Due to this multi-layered design procedure, such approaches are also commonly referred to as hierarchical control frameworks (Girard & Pap-pas 2009, Pappas et al. 2000, Girard & Pappas 2007, Tabuada & Pappas 2005, Smith et al. 2020). In order to proceed with such approaches, the notion of simulation functions (SFs) is typically employed to es-tablish a formal relation between the two systems. To elaborate on this notion, consider the system Sl in Def-inition 1, equipped with an output map as 

Sl :

 x+ = Ax + Bu, y = Cx, (13) where C ∈ Rr×n denotes the output matrix and y ∈ Y

represents the system output, with Y ⊂ Rr being the compact output set. Notice that Definition 1 corresponds to the special case in which the full state is taken as the output, i.e. , r = n and C = In. Accordingly, the output of the system at discrete time instant k ∈ N is denoted by yx0u(k) = Cx x0u(k). In the subsequent definition, we first introduce the ROM of the system Sl in (13), paving the way for presenting the notion of SFs. 

Definition 2 A ROM of the system Sl in (13) evolves according to 

ˆSl :

(

ˆx+ = ˆAˆx + ˆB ˆu, 

ˆy = ˆC ˆx, (14) 

where the matrices ˆA ∈ Rˆn×ˆn, ˆB ∈ Rˆn× ˆm, and ˆC ∈ Rr×ˆn

characterize the ROM, with potentially ˆn ≪ n. More-over, ˆx ∈ ˆX, ˆy ∈ ˆY , and ˆu ∈ ˆU denote the state, out-put, and control input of the ROM, respectively, where 

ˆX ⊂ Rˆn, ˆY ⊂ Rr , and ˆU ⊂ R ˆm represent the correspond-ing compact state, output, and input sets. For a given initial condition ˆx0 := ˆ x(0) ∈ ˆX and an input sequence 

ˆu : N → ˆU , the state of the ROM at discrete time instant 

k ∈ N is denoted by ˆxˆx0 ˆu(k), while ˆyˆx0 ˆu(k) = ˆC ˆxˆx0 ˆu(k)

represents the corresponding output. 

Having introduced the two systems Sl and ˆSl, we now formally define the notion of SFs in the subsequent definition, adapted from the work by Zamani & Arcak (2018), which is used to quantify the proximity between the output trajectories of Sl and ˆSl.

Definition 3 Consider the two systems Sl and ˆSl as in (13) and (14) , respectively. A function S : X × ˆX →

R≥0 is called a simulation function (SF) from ˆSl to Sl if there exist constants αs, ρ s ∈ R>0, and 0 < κ s < 1 such that 

• ∀ x ∈ X, ∀ˆx ∈ ˆX, αs∥Cx − ˆC ˆx∥2 ≤ S(x, ˆx), (15a) 

• ∀ x ∈ X, ∀ˆx ∈ ˆX, ∀ˆu ∈ ˆU , ∃u ∈ U, such that 

S(Ax + Bu, ˆAˆx + ˆB ˆu) ≤ κsS(x, ˆx) + ρs ∥ˆu∥2. (15b) The notion of SFs, as outlined in Definition 3, intuitively implies that if the outputs of Sl and ˆSl are initially sufficiently close (ensured by condition (15a)), they re-main close over time (enforced by condition (15b)). Con-dition (15b) also indicates the existence of a function 

u = u( x, ˆx, ˆu) that, for any x, ˆ x, and ˆ u, returns a corre-sponding input u for which condition (15b) holds; this function is referred to as an interface function. 15 The following theorem highlights the significance of the notion of SFs by providing a formal quantification of the error between the output trajectories of Sl and ˆSl (Samari, Sandberg, Johansson & Lavaei 2026 b). 

Theorem 4 Consider the system Sl in (13) and its ROM ˆSl as in (14) . Let S be an SF from ˆSl to Sl with as-sociated constants αs, ρ s ∈ R>0, and 0 < κ s < 1. Then, for any x0 ∈ X, ˆx0 ∈ ˆX, and input sequence ˆu : N → ˆU ,there exists an input sequence u : N → U such that the following inequality holds for all k ∈ N:

∥yx0u(k) − ˆyˆx0 ˆu(k)∥ ≤ 

s

S(x0, ˆx0)

αs

+ ϕs

αs(1 − κs) ,

(16) 

where ϕs = ρs∥ˆu∥2

> ∞

.

As Theorem 4 establishes an explicit bound on the mis-match between the output trajectories of Sl and ˆSl,the ROM can be used as a basis for enforcing a wide range of specifications on the concrete system, including safety, reachability, and reach-while-avoid. More specif-ically, one may first synthesize a formal controller for the lower-dimensional ROM ˆSl in a way that the re-quired specification is fulfilled. Subsequently, through a constructed interface function, this controller can be concretized for the higher-dimensional system Sl, while preserving the bounded discrepancy between the output trajectories of the two systems, as characterized in (16). To better highlight the main challenge in developing data-driven approaches for constructing infinite abstrac-tions, we present the following theorem (Lavaei et al. 2017, Lavaei, Soudjani, Abate & Zamani 2022), which provides conditions for constructing the ROM ˆSl and guarantees the existence of a quadratic SF from ˆSl to Sl.

Theorem 5 Consider the system Sl in (13) and its ROM ˆSl as in (14) . Suppose there exist matrices 

Ks ∈ Rm×n and Ps ∈ Rn×n, with Ps ≻ 0, such that 

C⊤C ⪯ Ps, (17a) 

κsPs − (1 + ϖ) (A + BK s)⊤Ps(A + BK s) ⪰ 0 (17b) 

hold for some constants ϖ ∈ R>0 and 0 < κ s < 1. If, in addition, 

AΘ + BΞ = Θ ˆA, (17c) 

CΘ = ˆC (17d) 

hold for some matrices Θ ∈ Rn×ˆn and Ξ ∈ Rm×ˆn, then there exists a quadratic SF from ˆSl to Sl of the form 

S(x, ˆx) = ( x − Θˆ x)⊤Ps(x − Θˆ x), (17e) 

where Θ is referred to as the reduction matrix. 

Remark 4 If the pair (A, B ) is stabilizable, then con-dition (17b) can be satisfied (Smith et al. 2020). More-over, condition (17c) holds provided that geometric con-dition (30) by Zamani & Arcak (2018) is satisfied. We also note that Theorem 5 does not pose any restriction on the matrix ˆB, which can therefore be selected arbitrar-ily. For instance, one may choose ˆB = Iˆn, resulting in a fully actuated ROM, thereby considerably simplifying the controller synthesis problem. 

Despite the advantages offered by SFs, constructing such functions requires precise knowledge of the system dy-namics. In particular, the system matrices appear ex-plicitly in conditions (15b) and (17). However, as dis-cussed previously, system models are often unavailable in practical settings, thereby motivating the develop-ment of data-driven approaches for constructing infinite abstractions using the notion of SFs. To develop such methodologies, one can make use of the data-driven approaches described in Section 2. Broadly speaking, upon fixing a suitable structure for the SF, with its coefficients treated as decision variables, as well as potentially selecting a candidate for the ROM ( e.g., 

fixing ˆA and ˆB in the linear case), the conditions required for its construction can be cast as robust optimization programs; in particular, conditions (15a) and (15b) can be encoded as optimization constraints that are required to hold over the relevant sets. The scenario-based coun-terpart can then be constructed using samples collected from the system. Subsequently, one can leverage Theo-rems 1 and 2 to construct the SF by solving the resulting scenario optimization program with formal guarantees. While the general idea is outlined here, the construction of infinite abstractions, together with the establishment of formal relations with their concrete systems using the scenario-based approaches in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, re-mains an important avenue for future work, as stated below. 

Research Avenue 1 Given an unknown general nonlinear system and a selected ROM candidate, de-velop a data-driven framework based on the scenario approach to construct an SF and its corresponding interface function, while providing out-of-sample per-formance guarantees. 

Alternatively, by fixing suitable structures for both the SF and the interface function, one may exploit structural properties of the system to derive a data-parameterized representation of the closed-loop system (see Section 2.3), which can then be used in place of the unknown system dynamics, thereby bypassing the need for an explicit system model. While the approaches de-scribed here can be regarded as representative solution frameworks, we note that other data-driven method-ologies have also been proposed in the literature, as reviewed hereafter. Within this realm, Awan & Zamani (2025) propose a 16 data-driven approach that combines Active Subspace theory and Gaussian process (GP) regression (Ras-mussen 2003) to construct ROMs for partially unknown discrete-time input-affine nonlinear control systems, providing probabilistic guarantees characterized by a confidence parameter (but not a violation parameter). We also note that the approach proposed by Awan & Zamani (2025) relies on an i.i.d. sampling scheme (cf. Fig. 6(a)), which necessitates multiple system ini-tializations for data collection. To move beyond prob-abilistic guarantees, Nadali, Zhong, Trivedi & Zamani (2024), without explicitly constructing ROMs, propose a neural-network-based data-driven approach for un-known discrete-time dynamical systems that leverages transfer learning techniques (Zhuang et al. 2021, Ben-David et al. 2010) to formally transfer a controller from a known abstract model, possibly a ROM, to an unknown system with deterministic guarantees. Specifically, the approach relies on grid-based sampling (cf. Fig. 6(b)) and employs certain Lipschitz continuity assumptions to establish deterministic out-of-sample correctness guarantees (cf. Section 2.2). We now continue by presenting studies that fall within the class of data-driven approaches exploiting system structural properties and yielding data-parameterized system representations, as discussed in Section 2.3. Un-like the two previous studies, these frameworks do not require multiple system initializations, thereby avoiding the key assumption of those studies. In this context, using the notion of SFs, Samari, Nejati & Lavaei (2025) develop a data-driven methodology for constructing ROMs of continuous-time linear dynamical systems, while providing deterministic trajectory-based closeness guarantees. Building on this work, Samari, Sandberg, Johansson & Lavaei (2026 a) propose a data-driven framework for constructing linear ROMs for continuous-time input-affine nonlinear dynamical systems, requiring only noise-corrupted input–state data collected along a single trajectory of the system, in contrast to the pre-vious study, which requires noise-free data, while still providing deterministic closeness guarantees. Although neither of these approaches can be directly applied to systems subject to process disturbances, Samari, Sand-berg, Johansson & Lavaei (2026 b) present a data-driven methodology for constructing ROMs of discrete-time linear dynamical systems in the presence of process dis-turbances, offering deterministic closeness guarantees. 

Remark 5 It is worth noting that while energy-based ap-proaches, including balanced truncation (Besselink et al. 2014), and Krylov methods, which rely on interpolation and/or moment-matching techniques (Astolfi 2010), also lead to the construction of ROMs, a fundamental distinc-tion between these methods and SF-based approaches is that these methods are primarily tailored to ensure sta-bility or input–output behavior preservation. In partic-ular, within these two aforementioned frameworks, the same input is typically applied to both the concrete sys-tem and its ROM, and the reduction error is quantified as the discrepancy between their input–output maps. In contrast, SF-based schemes allow different inputs for the two systems, coupled through an interface, while provid-ing explicit a priori trajectory-wise bounds on the out-put mismatch. This property enables their application in controller synthesis for complex specifications. As the fo-cus of this survey is on such specifications that go beyond mere stability, we restrict our attention to SF-based ap-proaches; however, for data-driven methods within the two aforementioned frameworks, we refer the interested reader to the works by Burohman et al. (2023), Kawano et al. (2020), Scarciotti & Astolfi (2017), Bhattacharjee et al. (2025), Moreschini et al. (2026), Mao & Scarciotti (2024) and references therein. 

While infinite abstractions are effective in addressing scalability challenges and can substantially simplify for-mal verification and controller synthesis, the resulting ROMs still possess uncountable state and input sets, which may render formal analysis and/or synthesis com-putationally demanding. Finite abstractions address this challenge by approximating concrete systems 2

with models that have finite state and input sets. Such abstractions are the focus of the next subsection. 

3.2 Finite Abstractions 

A finite abstraction ( a.k.a. a symbolic model) provides an approximate representation of a concrete system, where each discrete state corresponds to a set of con-tinuous states of the concrete system (cf. Step 3 in Fig. 3). Owing to their finite nature, such abstractions are particularly advantageous, as they enable the use of algorithmic machinery and existing software tools for systematic controller synthesis (cf. Step 4 in Fig. 3). The synthesized controllers can then be refined to the con-crete model, thereby enforcing complex specifications (cf. Step 5 in Fig. 3). As discussed in Section 1.2, such abstractions can be categorized into complete and sound abstractions. We first focus on complete abstractions and then elaborate on sound abstractions, highlighting their differences. To proceed, consider Sl in (13) as the concrete system 3 .Here, with a slight abuse of notation, we use ˆSl to denote the symbolic model of the system Sl. The construction process for complete abstractions begins by partitioning the state and input sets of the concrete system into finite segments, denoted by X = ∪iXi and U = ∪iUi, respec-tively. Representative points ˆ xi ∈ Xi and ˆ ui ∈ Ui are     

> 2Here, by concrete systems, we refer either to a relatively low-dimensional dynamical system or to a ROM of a high-dimensional dynamical system.
> 3Notice that while we consider Slin (13) as the concrete system, the subsequent discussion extends directly to the case where the concrete system is endowed with nonlinear dynamics, without requiring any substantial modifications.

17 then selected to serve as abstract states and control in-puts. The following definition formally outlines the pro-cedure for constructing a symbolic model (Pola et al. 2016, Swikir & Zamani 2019). 

Definition 4 Given the concrete system Sl, its symbolic model ˆSl (i.e., complete abstraction) is described by 

ˆSl :

(

ˆx+ = ˆf (ˆ x, ˆu) = Π( Aˆx + B ˆu),

ˆy = C ˆx, (18) 

where ˆx ∈ ˆX and ˆu ∈ ˆU represent the abstract state and input, respectively, with ˆX := {ˆxi | i = 1 , . . . , n ˆx}

and ˆU := {ˆui | i = 1 , . . . , n ˆu} denoting the finite state and input sets of ˆSl, and ˆy ∈ ˆY is the output, with ˆY

representing the finite output set of ˆSl. Moreover, ˆf :ˆX × ˆU → ˆX is the transition map, where the quantization map Π : X → ˆX assigns to any x ∈ X a representative point ˆx ∈ ˆX from the corresponding partition, satisfying 

∥Π( x) − x∥ ≤ δ, ∀x ∈ X, (19) 

where δ := sup ∥x − x′∥, x, x′ ∈ Xi, i = 1 , 2, . . . , n ˆx

is the state discretization parameter. 

Despite the benefits of constructing symbolic models, a key challenge is ensuring that properties established for the symbolic model can be reliably transferred to the cor-responding concrete system. To address this, a similarity relation between the output trajectories of the two sys-tems should be established, which is typically achieved using the notion of SFs, as defined in Definition 3. We note that when employing SFs between a concrete sys-tem and its symbolic model, condition (15b) requires a slight modification. In particular, an additional constant term ψs ∈ R>0 should be included on the right-hand side of condition (15b) to capture an inherent approximation error, which depends on the state discretization parame-ter δ. Consequently, the corresponding closeness guaran-tee in (16) should be modified accordingly, with ϕs being defined as ϕs := ρs∥ˆu∥2 

> ∞

+ ψs. Alternatively, the litera-ture proposes that the closeness between the behavior of a concrete system and that of its symbolic model can also be captured through simulation relations . More specifi-cally, using the so-called ϵ-approximate simulation rela-tion (Tabuada 2009, Definition 9.2), one can guarantee that the output behaviors of the two systems are ϵ-close, as established in model-based frameworks (Swikir & Za-mani 2019, Proposition 2.4) and data-driven methodolo-gies (Samari, Zaker & Lavaei 2025, Theorem 1). In data-driven settings for complete abstractions, two main challenges arise: how to construct the symbolic model directly from data, and how to relate the concrete system to its symbolic model via SFs when the unknown dynamics appear explicitly in the conditions for their construction. Regarding the first challenge, we note that while the mathematical model of the concrete system Sl

is unknown, its symbolic model ˆf (ˆ x, ˆu) = Π( Aˆx + B ˆu)can still be constructed in a data-driven manner. Specif-ically, assuming direct measurability of all state vari-ables ( i.e. , C = In), for each discrete state ˆ x and in-put ˆ u, we initialize the system Sl at ˆ x under the input ˆu, and obtain the corresponding successor state associ-ated with Aˆx + B ˆu. Given a state discretization param-eter δ, the quantization map Π is applied to determine ˆf (ˆ x, ˆu) = Π( Aˆx + B ˆu) as the representative point clos-est to Aˆx + B ˆu that satisfies condition (19) (cf. Step 3 in Fig. 3). Repeating this procedure for all combinations of discrete states ˆ x ∈ ˆX and inputs ˆ u ∈ ˆU yields the data-driven symbolic model. This construction is fully aligned with the procedure adopted in the model-based setting. As discussed in Section 3.1, the second challenge, namely the construction of SFs in a data-driven setting, can also be addressed by employing the data-driven frameworks described in Section 2. In particular, one may either re-formulate the conditions for SF construction as robust optimization programs, construct their scenario-based counterparts using collected samples, and exploit the guarantees presented in Sections 2.1 and 2.2, or lever-age system structural properties, as described in Sec-tion 2.3, to replace the unknown dynamics with their data-parameterized representations. Notwithstanding the above discussion, it is important to note that the existence of an SF between a concrete sys-tem, possibly with nonlinear dynamics, and its symbolic model is guaranteed under the assumption that the sys-tem is incrementally input-to-state stable ( δ-ISS). In the case of linear dynamics, this property reduces to conven-tional stability. We highlight that this assumption is im-plicitly reflected in condition (15b) through the require-ment 0 < κ s < 1. Yet, for completeness, we formally present the notion of δ-ISS for the system Sl in the fol-lowing definition (Swikir & Zamani 2019). Notice that while we present the following definition for the system 

Sl with linear dynamics, it extends naturally to nonlin-ear dynamical systems, as well. 

Definition 5 The system Sl (13) is incrementally input-to-state stable ( δ-ISS) if, for some constants α, α , ρ ∈

R>0, and 0 < κ < 1, there exists a function S : X × X →

R≥0, such that 

• ∀ x, x ′ ∈ X, α∥x − x′∥2 ≤ S(x, x ′) ≤ α∥x − x′∥2, (20a) 

• ∀ x, x ′ ∈ X, ∀u, u ′ ∈ U, 

S(Ax + Bu, Ax ′ + Bu ′) ≤ κ S(x, x ′) + ρ ∥u − u′∥2.

(20b) The δ-ISS property in Definition 5 characterizes the in-cremental behavior of the system by relating the distance 18 between two trajectories to both their initial separation and the mismatch between their input sequences. In par-ticular, when the two systems are driven by identical inputs ( u = u′), the trajectory mismatch decays expo-nentially to zero. More generally, when the inputs differ, the influence of the initial mismatch still decays expo-nentially, while the state mismatch is bounded by a dis-counted accumulation of the input mismatch ∥u − u′∥2.The results in Swikir & Zamani (2019) establish that ˆSl,defined in Definition 4, is a complete finite abstraction of Sl, where the function S in Definition 5 serves as an SF from ˆSl to Sl and vice versa. Despite the advantages of complete abstractions, partic-ularly in providing necessary and sufficient guarantees on controller design, their construction requires the con-crete system to be δ-ISS as in Definition 5, which may limit applicability. Constructing sound abstractions, in-stead of complete ones, helps relax this restrictive re-quirement; we now explain how such abstractions are typically constructed. Such construction typically relies on an overapproximation of the system’s reachable sets at each time step. To do so, as in the case of complete ab-stractions, the uncountable state and input sets are first partitioned into finitely many cells, each represented by a discrete state and input. The key difference, however, arises in how transitions are computed. In particular, for each pair of a discrete state and input, the system is conceptually evolved over an instant in time; however, rather than computing an exact successor, an overap-proximation of all reachable states is determined. This overapproximation is commonly obtained using the no-tion of a growth bound (Reissig et al. 2016), which char-acterizes how the set of possible next states can expand. Once such a reachable set estimate is obtained, all dis-crete cells intersecting the reachable set are identified as possible successors. In this way, the abstraction de-liberately includes every behavior that the concrete sys-tem could exhibit, thereby ensuring soundness. In fact, while this approach does not require incremental stabil-ity of the underlying system, the trade-off is that sound abstractions provide only sufficient guarantees. That is, the absence of a controller on the abstraction does not imply that no suitable controller exists for the original system. To formalize the above discussion, let us consider the system 

Sc : ˙ x = fc(x, u ), (21) where X ⊂ Rn and U ⊂ Rm denote the state and input sets, respectively, and fc : X × U → Rn denotes the vec-tor field, which is assumed to be locally Lipschitz contin-uous for each u ∈ U . Let τ ∈ R>0 be the sampling time. For an initial state x0 ∈ X, a trajectory of the system over [0 , τ ] is defined as an absolutely continuous function 

σx0u : [0 , τ ] → X satisfying (21) for all t ∈ [0 , τ ], given a constant input u ∈ U over the interval [0 , τ ]; i.e. , the input signal is piecewise constant across sampling inter-vals. We recall that the uncountable state and input sets are partitioned as X = ∪iXi(x) and U = ∪iUi, respec-tively, where ˆ xi ∈ Xi(x) and ˆ ui ∈ Ui are representative discrete state and input points. Accordingly, the cor-responding discrete state and input sets are defined as ˆX := {ˆxi | i = 1 , . . . , n ˆx} and ˆU := {ˆui | i = 1 , . . . , n ˆu},respectively, where δ and δu denote the state and input discretization parameters (see Definition 4). As mentioned earlier, to construct sound abstractions, one needs to exploit the notion of growth bound, as for-malized below (Ajeleye et al. 2023). 

Definition 6 For the system Sc in (21) , let ˆX and ˆU

denote its symbolic state and input sets. A function χ :

Rn 

> ≥0

× ˆX × ˆU → Rn 

> ≥0

is called a growth bound of Sc if it satisfies 

|σx′ ˆu(τ ) − σˆxˆu(τ )| ≤ χ(|x′ − ˆx|, ˆx, ˆu), (22) 

for any ˆx ∈ ˆX, ˆu ∈ ˆU , and x′ ∈ Xi(ˆ x).

Under the growth bound notion in Definition 6, we now present the definition of sound abstractions (Ajeleye et al. 2023). 

Definition 7 Given the system Sc in (21) with a growth bound χ, let Sτc denote the sampled system associated with Sc. Then, ˆSc is a sound abstraction of Sτc , with the finite state and input sets ˆX and ˆU , respectively, and the transition map ˆfc : ˆX × ˆU ⇒ ˆX if: 

• the set ∪ˆx∈ ˆX Xi(ˆ x) forms a non-empty cover of X;

• for any ˆx, ˆx′ ∈ ˆX and ˆu ∈ ˆU , (σˆxˆu(τ ) ⊕ [−p′, p ′]) ∩

Xi(ˆ x′)̸ = ∅ ⇒ ˆx′ ∈ ˆfc(ˆ x, ˆu), where p′ = χ(δ, ˆx, ˆu).

If a sound abstraction is constructed as described in Def-inition 7, then a feedback refinement relation (Reissig et al. 2016) can be established between the sampled sys-tem associated with Sc and its finite abstraction. This enables the synthesis of a controller over the finite ab-straction and its subsequent refinement to the original system, while fulfilling the property of interest. Akin to the case of complete abstractions, constructing sound abstractions in data-driven settings is challeng-ing, primarily due to the unknown system dynamics. In particular, computing a growth bound, as described in Definition 6, necessitates model knowledge, as it is typ-ically obtained by bounding the Jacobian of the system dynamics. Accordingly, several data-driven approaches have been proposed for constructing sound abstractions and for establishing formal relations between them and their concrete counterparts, providing various types of formal guarantees, which we review in the subsequent subsection. 19 3.3 Literature on Data-Driven Construction of Finite Abstractions (Sound and Complete) 

As expected, indirect data-driven approaches for con-structing finite abstractions of dynamical systems can be regarded as the earliest solution frameworks. In this context, Jackson et al. (2020) propose an indirect data-driven approach to obtain finite abstractions of discrete-time dynamical systems, where the unknown dynamics are learned via GP regression. The resulting abstraction is subsequently employed for safety verifi-cation, providing Bayesian-based probabilistic guaran-tees. By leveraging GP regression, together with certain Lipschitz continuity bounds on the unknown dynamics, Hashimoto et al. (2022) present an indirect data-driven approach for constructing symbolic models of discrete-time dynamical systems subject to bounded distur-bances. Through the notion of alternating simulation relations, the framework enables refinement of a con-troller designed for the symbolic model into a controller for the original system for arbitrary specifications (not limited to safety, unlike the previous work), while pro-viding deterministic correctness guarantees. While the approach by Hashimoto et al. (2022) applies to partially unknown dynamical systems, the indirect data-driven method proposed by Skovbekk et al. (2025) accom-modates fully unknown dynamics and, importantly, stochastic noise in the output measurements (while the system dynamics themselves remain determinis-tic), providing Bayesian-based probabilistic correctness guarantees in the construction of finite abstractions. As discussed in Section 1.1, due to the inherent chal-lenges of indirect data-driven approaches, significant attention has been devoted to developing direct data-driven methods for constructing finite abstractions of dynamical systems. In this vein, Devonport et al. (2021), without imposing smoothness or regularity assumptions on the dynamics, propose a data-driven approach that requires only the ability to evaluate successor states under given inputs. The approach relies on i.i.d. sam-pling (cf. Fig. 6(a)) and provides PAC guarantees (cf. Section 2.1) for the constructed abstractions. Never-theless, the proposed framework can only be employed to satisfy finite-horizon specifications. Building on the works of Banse et al. (2023 a) and Banse et al. (2023 b), Banse et al. (2025) propose a data-driven approach for constructing finite abstractions of discrete-time dynam-ical systems, with a focus on formal verification. The approach incorporates memory to better capture the dynamics in specific regions of the state space. Based on i.i.d. sampling, Coppola, Peruffo & Mazo (2023) and Coppola, Peruffo & Mazo Jr (2023) propose data-driven frameworks for constructing symbolic ab-stractions of discrete-time linear and nonlinear dynam-ical systems for verifying complex logic specifications. The general idea in these studies is to sample finite-length trajectories of an unknown system and construct an abstraction from the observed behaviors, while pro-viding PAC guarantees that the resulting abstraction behaviorally includes the concrete system over both finite and infinite time horizons. Building on this line of work, Coppola, Peruffo, Lindemann & Mazo (2024) extend the framework to general unknown determin-istic systems and derive classical PAC guarantees via the scenario approach (cf. Section 2.1), as well as finite-sample, distribution-free probabilistic inclusion guar-antees based on conformal prediction (Shafer & Vovk 2008, Lindemann et al. 2025). The application of the aforementioned data-driven ap-proaches to event-triggered control systems is also inves-tigated by Peruffo & Mazo (2022) and Peruffo & Mazo (2025). While the former considers only linear dynam-ical systems, the latter extends the framework to non-linear dynamical systems and noisy data; both stud-ies provide PAC-style out-of-sample performance guar-antees. Within this line of work, Coppola, Peruffo & Mazo Jr (2024) move beyond constructing finite abstrac-tions solely for formal verification and propose a data-driven approach, based on i.i.d. sampling, for controller synthesis. To do so, Coppola, Peruffo & Mazo Jr (2024) rely on the notion of probabilistic alternating simula-tion and provide PAC guarantees that the constructed symbolic model captures all behaviors of the concrete system. Despite the benefits of the aforementioned advance-ments, we recall that PAC-bound guarantees are in-herently endowed with a violation parameter (cf. Sec-tion 2.1, in particular Theorem 1). This implies that the constructed finite abstraction may be incorrect over a small subset of the state space, whose measure can be reduced at the expense of increased computational effort. In particular, achieving zero violation would re-quire an infinite number of samples, as discussed in Section 2.2. This limitation motivates the development of direct data-driven approaches for constructing finite abstractions that provide correctness guarantees over the entire state space, albeit with a confidence level (cf. Section 2.2). Within this context, Lavaei & Frazzoli (2022) propose a data-driven approach for constructing complete finite abstractions of discrete-time dynamical systems, which, by employing ϵ-approximate alternating bisimulation re-lations, can be used for formal control synthesis tasks. Although the proposed method relies on i.i.d. sampling, by exploiting certain Lipschitz continuity conditions, the resulting guarantee is not endowed with a violation pa-rameter and involves only a confidence parameter. That is, the constructed abstraction is guaranteed to be cor-rect over the entire state space with a prescribed (po-tentially high) confidence level. In addition, by exploit-ing Lipschitz continuity conditions, Kazemi et al. (2024) and Ajeleye et al. (2023) propose data-driven approaches for constructing sound finite abstractions of continuous-20 time dynamical systems subject to process disturbances. While the correctness guarantee by Kazemi et al. (2024) is endowed with a confidence parameter, Ajeleye et al. (2023) eliminate this, thereby providing deterministic correctness guarantees (cf. Section 2.2). We note that this distinction primarily arises from the data collection procedure; Kazemi et al. (2024) rely on i.i.d. sampling, whereas Ajeleye et al. (2023) employ grid-based sam-pling (cf. Fig. 6(b)). It is worth noting that, compared with approaches providing PAC guarantees, the stud-ies discussed here exhibit exponential sample complex-ity with respect to the dimension of the sampling space. This increase in sample complexity reflects the cost of providing formal guarantees without a violation param-eter. A common feature of most studies surveyed above is the lack of explicit exploitation of structural properties in dynamical systems. However, as discussed in Section 2.3, leveraging such properties can be highly beneficial in various aspects, albeit typically at the cost of restrict-ing the class of dynamical systems. Within this context, as an extension of the works by Makdesi et al. (2021 a)and Makdesi et al. (2021 b), Makdesi et al. (2023) propose a data-driven approach for computing set-valued overap-proximations of unknown monotone functions subject to additive bounded disturbances. In particular, Makdesi et al. (2023) provide a characterization of a simulating map that provably contains all monotone functions con-sistent with the collected data, providing deterministic correctness guarantees. The resulting data-driven over-approximations are subsequently employed to construct models of partially unknown systems whose unknown components are monotone. These models can then be used to build finite-state symbolic models suitable for formal control synthesis, as they are related to the cor-responding concrete systems via alternating simulation relations. We note that, even with i.i.d. sampling, the proposed approach, unlike previously surveyed studies, can provide deterministic guarantees, primarily due to exploiting structural properties of the system. Notice also that while the approach by Makdesi et al. (2023) can be classified as an indirect data-driven method, we present it here because it explicitly exploits the struc-tural properties of the underlying systems. Another line of work that involves exploiting struc-tural properties of dynamical systems focuses on data-parameterized system representations, as discussed in Section 2.3. In this context, Samari, Zaker & Lavaei (2025) propose a data-driven approach for constructing complete finite abstractions of discrete-time input-affine polynomial dynamical systems, using input–state data collected along only two system trajectories, while pro-viding deterministic guarantees. By employing the no-tion of ϵ-approximate alternating simulation relations, the framework enables the design of a discrete controller for the symbolic model and its subsequent refinement to the concrete system via a hybrid interface function, ensuring the satisfaction of the desired specification. 

Research Avenue 2 Consider a concrete system with general nonlinear dynamics subject to bounded process disturbances. Develop a data-driven approach that exploits structural properties of the system to derive a data-parameterized representation (cf. Sec-tion 2.3) and construct a symbolic model of the con-crete system from noisy data, while providing deter-ministic correctness guarantees for the resulting ab-straction. 

While abstraction-based approaches offer several bene-fits, such as being well suited to rich specifications and algorithmic synthesis, the discretization of uncountable state and input sets required for their construction can limit their applicability due to the resulting computa-tional complexity, particularly in higher-dimensional settings. This central challenge motivates the devel-opment of discretization-free approaches that avoid gridding while retaining formal guarantees, namely functional certificate approaches. In particular, while certificate-based approaches can be potentially con-servative and may often be more difficult to construct for rich specifications, they avoid explicit state-space discretization and can scale more favorably. We review such methodologies in the subsequent section. 

4 Deterministic Setting: Data-Driven Func-tional Certificate Approaches 

This section is devoted to data-driven functional certifi-cate methodologies for deterministic dynamical systems, including (control) barrier certificates, control barrier functions, k-inductive (control) barrier certificates, and (control) closure certificates. These certificates provide a powerful framework for formal verification and syn-thesis to enforce diverse, complex specifications without resorting to state-space discretization (cf. Fig. 4). The data-driven developments reviewed in this section build upon a rich body of model-based literature discussed in Section 1.3. One of the early efforts bridging model-based and data-driven perspectives is the work by Han et al. (2015), where the multiplicative weights method is employed within a barrier-certificate-based framework for data-driven model validation of dynamical systems, with an emphasis on scalability to large collections of trajectory data. Recent years have witnessed substantial progress in the development of data-driven frameworks for the synthesis of functional certificates, which often follow the scheme in Fig. 5. In alignment with the overall structure of the survey, this section systematically reviews three princi-pal data-driven approaches, i.e. , those grounded in the scenario approach with PAC guarantees, those on the ba-sis of certain Lipschitz continuity conditions, and those exploiting system structural properties. In each part, we 21 discuss the underlying assumptions, the associated syn-thesis procedures, and, crucially, the proposed formal out-of-sample performance guarantees that ensure the validity of the learned certificates beyond the observed data. To do so, we first present a general deterministic discrete-time dynamical system in the following defini-tion. 

Definition 8 A discrete-time nonlinear dynamical sys-tem Sg evolves according to 

Sg : x+ = f (x, u ), (23) 

where x ∈ X denotes the system state and u ∈ U repre-sents the control input, with X ⊂ Rn and U ⊂ Rm, re-spectively, denoting the compact state and input spaces. The mapping f : X × U → Rn characterizing the sys-tem dynamics is assumed to be unknown. For a given initial condition x0 := x(0) ∈ X and an input sequence 

u : N → U , the state reached at discrete time instant 

k ∈ N is denoted by xx0u(k).

The system Sg in (23) is intentionally stated in its gen-eral nonlinear form. While we adopt this level of general-ity to provide a unified framework, a significant portion of the existing literature focuses on specific subclasses of (23). These include input-affine structures, particu-lar classes of nonlinearities, or purely linear dynamics. Throughout the discussion of related studies, we explic-itly indicate whenever such structural restrictions are imposed. We further remark that, in relation to the sys-tem Sg introduced in Definition 8, a similar system def-inition can be formulated in a continuous-time frame-work. However, for the sake of brevity and to maintain a consistent exposition, we confine our discussion to the discrete-time setting. Nevertheless, we stress that the results surveyed in this work encompass both discrete-time and continuous-time settings, and this distinction is clearly specified whenever relevant. Having introduced the system of interest in Definition 8, we now proceed by formally presenting the control bar-rier certificate notion in the subsequent definition (Pra-jna & Jadbabaie 2004, Samari & Lavaei 2025). 

Definition 9 Consider the system Sg in Definition 8, with the initial set X0 ⊂ X and the unsafe set Xu ⊂ X.A function B : X → R is considered as a control barrier certificate (CBC) for the system Sg over the time horizon 

[0 , T − 1] , with T ∈ N≥1, if there exist c ∈ R≥0 and 

η, γ ∈ R, with η + cT < γ , such that 

• ∀ x ∈ X0:

B(x) ≤ η, (24a) 

• ∀ x ∈ Xu:

B(x) ≥ γ, (24b) 

• ∀ x ∈ X, ∃u ∈ U, such that 

B(f (x, u )) ≤ B(x) + c. (24c) According to Definition 9, CBCs are defined and con-structed on the system state space, enforcing a collec-tion of inequality constraints on the CBC itself (cf. con-ditions (24a) and (24b)), as well as on its one-step evo-lution (cf. condition (24c)). A suitably chosen level set of the CBC, denoted by η, acts as a separator that iso-lates the unsafe region Xu from trajectories originating in the set of admissible initial states X0; see Fig. 4 for illustration. Before proceeding further, it is worthwhile to note that a barrier certificate (BC) is closely related to a CBC, differing primarily in the underlying objective, namely, verification versus synthesis. Specifically, when the sys-tem Sg admits no control input, the problem reduces to verifying whether the system satisfies a safety property. In this case, a BC is defined in an analogous way to Def-inition 9, with the key distinction that the control input 

u does not appear in condition (24c). 

Remark 6 Condition (24c) does not require the CBC to be non-increasing because of the constant c ∈ R≥0.Allowing the CBC to increase in this way substantially improves the feasibility of CBC construction, while en-suring safety over a finite time horizon. Moreover, since Definition 9 enforces the constraint T < γ−ηc , it follows directly that T → ∞ as c → 0. We further note that, par-ticularly in deterministic settings, condition (24c) typi-cally does not involve the parameter c, i.e., c = 0 , which yields infinite-horizon safety guarantees. 

Remark 7 It is important to note that the sets X0 and 

Xu should be disjoint in Definition 9 (cf. Fig. 4). In particular, we require γ > η + cT , which directly implies 

γ > η . This relation ensures that the sets X0 and Xu do not intersect, as follows from conditions (24a) and (24b) ;otherwise, the system is unsafe from the outset. 

The following theorem, adapted from the literature (Pra-jna et al. 2007, Nejati, Lavaei, Jagtap, Soudjani & Za-mani 2023), employs the notion of CBCs to establish formal safety guarantees. 

Theorem 6 Given the system Sg , let B be a CBC for Sg

in the sense of Definition 9. Then, Sg is safe over a finite horizon T ; that is, xx0u(k) /∈ Xu for all x0 ∈ X0 and all 

k ∈ [0 , T − 1] , under the control input u (associated with the CBC B), provided that T < γ−ηc .

Theorem 6 applies whenever the system Sg is equipped with a CBC in the sense of Definition 9, or with a BC when addressing safety verification. Nevertheless, the construction of such certificates inherently depends on the system dynamics, since the mapping f (x, u ) appears 22 explicitly in condition (24c). This motivates the develop-ment of data-driven approaches for synthesizing CBCs or BCs. For completeness, we note that safety specifications have also been extensively studied using control barrier func-tions (CBFs) (Wieland & Allg¨ ower 2007, Ames et al. 2019). This notion, which can be viewed as complemen-tary to the concept of CBCs, offers another means for safety analysis. Indeed, frameworks based on CBFs typ-ically provide online safety filters, where the safety con-troller is obtained via an optimization problem that aims to account for both safety specifications and desired per-formance. In such approaches, safety is often character-ized as the forward invariance of a user-defined safe set C.Such a safety definition coincides with the one considered in Theorem 6 (see also Definition 9) when C := X\Xu

and X0 := C. The notion of CBFs is formally defined in the subsequent definition (Agrawal & Sreenath 2017, Cosner et al. 2024). 

Definition 10 Consider a system Sg in (23) . Let C :

X → R be a continuous function, with C ⊂ Rn being its 0-superlevel set, i.e., C := {x ∈ X | C(x) ≥ 0}. The function C is a control barrier function (CBF) for Sg if, for some α ∈ [0 , 1] and for each x ∈ X, there exists a corresponding u ∈ U satisfying 

C(f (x, u )) ≥ αC(x). (25) As shown by Agrawal & Sreenath (2017) and Cosner et al. (2024), the existence of a CBF implies controlled forward invariance of the set C. Nevertheless, one can observe that the unknown dynamics also appear in (25), similar to condition (24c), highlighting the need for the development of data-driven approaches. Over the past decade, this challenge has attracted significant atten-tion, leading to a substantial body of literature propos-ing various data-driven methodologies, which we review in the following subsection. While the focus here is on ap-proaches based on CBCs/CBFs, we also include closely related data-driven methods for constructing safety cer-tificates. 

4.1 Literature on Data-Driven Design of Safety Cer-tificates 

Within the research line on synthesizing safety cer-tificates for dynamical systems with (partially) un-known dynamics, indirect data-driven approaches can be viewed as one of the earliest solution paradigms (cf. Fig. 2(a)). In particular, GPs have been employed due to their ability to provide nonparametric models equipped with probabilistic uncertainty quantification (Kocijan 2016), where the resulting guarantees are also proba-bilistic. In this context, and assuming prior knowledge of CBCs, the works by Wang et al. (2018) and Cheng et al. (2019) address safety-critical learning in continuous- and discrete-time settings, respectively. Specifically, these contributions enable safe online learning of GP models and the safe learning of reinforcement learning policies. In a related direction, Jagtap et al. (2020) introduce a two-stage framework for the synthesis of safety con-trollers for continuous-time dynamical systems. In this approach, GPs are first employed to learn the unknown component of the system dynamics, after which CBC-based safety controllers are designed, while providing safety guarantees with specified confidence levels. We note that the aforementioned works focus on input-affine nonlinear systems, which constitute a specific sub-class of the model introduced in Definition 8. In par-ticular, the transition map is assumed to take the form 

f (x, u ) = fa(x)+ g(x)u, where g : X → Rn×m is known, while fa : X → Rn remains unknown. Furthermore, the presence of an explicit model identification phase ren-ders the overall design procedure inherently two-step, which can be both computationally expensive and time-consuming. We refer interested readers to the studies by Dhiman et al. (2023), Fisac et al. (2019), Waber-sich et al. (2023), Wabersich & Zeilinger (2021), Awan & Zamani (2023), Lederer et al. (2025) for additional insights on the CBC/CBF construction grounded in in-direct data-driven approaches. We note that alternative methodologies for safety controller synthesis based on CBCs/CBFs have also been proposed, such as the work by Qin et al. (2022) (see also the survey by Dawson et al. (2023) for a broader overview). In this survey, however, we restrict our attention to approaches that provide for-mal guarantees. In the vein of direct data-driven approaches, Akella & Ames (2022) propose a safety verification framework based on barrier functions for continuous-time dynam-ical systems. The approach focuses on systems whose controllers vary with respect to a parameterized input, 

e.g. , varying obstacle locations. For such systems, Akella & Ames (2022) provide either a PAC guarantee for sys-tem safety, as discussed in Section 2.1, or a counterexam-ple indicating a safety violation. Moreover, a data-driven semi-parametric approach for learning CBFs is proposed by Zhu et al. (2025). Specifically, using noise-corrupted data, the method simultaneously learns a CBF-based safety certificate to ensure robust controlled invariance for continuous-time nonlinear systems subject to distur-bances, providing PAC-based guarantees. Inspired by the pick-to-learn framework (Paccagnan et al. 2023), Rickard et al. (2026) develop a methodology for synthe-sizing various certificates, including BCs, for discrete-time dynamical systems, providing PAC-style guaran-tees. The extension of this framework to the continuous-time setting is also explored by Rickard et al. (2025). Although the aforementioned studies focus on determin-istic systems, the PAC nature of the proposed guaran-tees introduces not only a confidence level but also a certain degree of risk in the safety guarantees, i.e. , the 23 possibility of safety being violated (cf. Section 2.1). To mitigate this issue, several studies exploit Lipschitz con-tinuity conditions to eliminate either only the violation parameter or both the violation and confidence parame-ters (cf. Section 2.2). Before reviewing these studies, we first outline how such frameworks operate in the synthe-sis of BCs for clarity of exposition. As the first step, the structure of a BC is chosen as 

B(x, q) = Pr 

> j=1

qj pj (x), where each p j (x) denotes a user-defined (potentially nonlinear) basis function and q = [q 1 . . . qr]⊤ ∈ Rr represents the unknown co-efficients to be designed. For instance, in the case of polynomial-type BCs, each basis function p j (x), for all 

j ∈ { 1, . . . , r}, is a monomial in x. Subsequently, the conditions in (24), with condition (24c) adapted for BCs since the control input u no longer appears in (24c), can be formulated as the following robust convex program (RCP): min [μ; d] μ (26a) s.t. max  

> j

{hj (x, d )} ≤ μ, j ∈ { 1, . . . , 4}, ∀x ∈ X, 

(26b) 

d = [ η; γ; c; κ; q 1; q 2; . . . ; q r] ∈ Rr+4 ,

κ ∈ R\R≥0, η, γ, μ ∈ R, c ∈ R≥0,

where 

h1(x, d ) = ( B(x, q) − η)1X0 (x),h2(x, d ) = ( −B(x, q) + γ)1Xu (x),h3(x, d ) = η + cT − γ − κ,h4(x, d ) = B(f (x), q) − B(x, q) − c, 

(27) with κ incorporated into h3(x, d ) in (27) to ensure that the condition γ > η is satisfied even when c = 0. If 

μ∗ 

> RCP

< 0, with μ∗ 

> RCP

being the optimal value of the RCP (26), then a solution to the RCP (26) indicates that the conditions in (24) are satisfied. As discussed previously, solving the RCP (26) is in-tractable since it involves the unknown dynamics f (x), which motivates the development of its corresponding scenario convex program (SCP). Based on the approach described in Section 2.2, the data used to construct the SCP corresponding to the RCP (26) can typically be obtained in two different ways, which nevertheless share a common structure. In both cases, two consecu-tive sample points along system trajectories are required, 

i.e. , sample pairs of the form ( xzi , x +zi

), or equivalently (xzi , f (xzi )), where each xzi , for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, de-notes a scenario; thus, a total of N sample pairs are gath-ered from the system. The key difference, however, lies in the sampling strategy: either i.i.d. samples are drawn from X (cf. Fig. 6(a)), or sampling is performed using a grid-based scheme over X (cf. Fig. 6(b)). The SCP corresponding to the RCP (26) is described as min [μ; d] μ (28a) s.t. max  

> j

{hj (x, d ), h 4(xzi , d )} ≤ μ, j ∈ { 1, 2, 3},

(28b) 

∀x ∈ X, ∀xzi ∈ X, ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , N },d = [ η; γ; c; κ; q 1; q 2; . . . ; q r] ∈ Rr+4 ,

κ ∈ R\R≥0, η, γ, μ ∈ R, c ∈ R≥0,

with an optimal value μ∗ 

> SCP

and optimizer d∗

> SCP

.The key assumption enabling the derivation of formal guarantees without introducing a violation parameter is that B(x, q) and f (x) are Lipschitz continuous with respect to x, with Lipschitz constants L1 and Lf , re-spectively. Consequently, as both B(x, q) and f (x) are Lipschitz continuous over the compact state space X,

h4(x, d ) is also Lipschitz continuous with respect to x,with Lipschitz constant L2. In the following theorem, we formally state the guarantees obtained by solving the SCP (28) under both i.i.d. and grid-based sampling schemes (Nejati, Lavaei, Jagtap, Soudjani & Zamani 2023, Nejati & Zamani 2023). 

Theorem 7 Consider the system Sg as in Definition 8 (without the control input u), with the initial set X0 ⊂ X

and the unsafe set Xu ⊂ X. Let the SCP (28) be solved using N sample pairs, with the optimal value of μ∗ 

> SCP

and the solution d∗ 

> SCP

= [ η∗; γ∗; c∗; κ∗; q ∗

> 1

; q ∗

> 2

; . . . ; q ∗ 

> r

].

• If the data are collected under the i.i.d. sampling scheme, and if condition (6) holds, with v := r + 4 

and L := L2, then, Sg is safe with confidence at least 1 − ε2, in the sense of Theorem 6, over the time horizon [0 , T − 1] , with T < γ∗−η∗ 

> c∗

.

• If the data are collected under the grid-based sampling scheme, and if condition (8) holds, with L := L2 and 

ϱ as in (5) , then Sg is safe, in the sense of Theorem 6, over the time horizon [0 , T − 1] , with T < γ∗−η∗ 

> c∗

.

Remark 8 The constraints corresponding to h1 and h2

in the SCP (28) are required to hold for all x ∈ X0

and x ∈ Xu, respectively. This requirement arises un-der the i.i.d. sampling scheme, as the presence of piece-wise constant indicator functions prevents the use of Lip-schitz continuity arguments. However, under the grid-based sampling scheme, the indicator functions appearing in h1 and h2 can be removed, allowing the corresponding constraints to be imposed only on samples drawn from X0

and Xu, respectively. Specifically, in this setting, all con-straints can be enforced directly using data, in contrast to the SCP (28) , where the collected data are used solely for the constraint associated with h4. Upon this modifi-cation, if condition (8) holds, with L := max {L1, L2},the unknown system is safe, in the sense of Theorem 6, over the time horizon [0 , T − 1] , for any T < γ∗−η∗ 

> c∗

.

24 Having described the frameworks based on Lipschitz continuity conditions, we now review their correspond-ing literature. Within this line of work, using the no-tion of BCs, Nejati, Lavaei, Jagtap, Soudjani & Zamani (2023) propose a data-driven framework for safety ver-ification in both discrete- and continuous-time settings. Although the proposed approach eliminates the viola-tion parameter in the safety guarantee, it still involves an a priori confidence parameter arising from the use of i.i.d. sampling (cf. first case in Theorem 7). As discussed by Nejati, Lavaei, Jagtap, Soudjani & Zamani (2023) in Remark 5.7, the sample complexity of the proposed approach grows exponentially with respect to the num-ber of state variables of the unknown system, which is generally undesirable. To address this challenge, Amin-zadeh et al. (2026) propose a data-driven framework for safety verification of discrete-time dynamical systems, based on the concept of BCs, which provides both deter-ministic and probabilistic guarantees by incorporating physical principles of the underlying dynamics to elimi-nate redundant samples and thereby reduce the required number of samples. While the aforementioned study focuses on safety veri-fication, the data-driven design of safety controllers has also been investigated in the literature. In this respect, Nejati & Zamani (2023) propose a data-driven method-ology for synthesizing safety controllers for discrete-time unknown dynamical systems with finite input sets, in-troducing the notion of multiple CBCs. Notably, us-ing grid-based sampling and certain Lipschitz continuity conditions, the proposed framework provides determin-istic guarantees that the synthesized controller satisfies the desired safety specification. Moreover, Ajeleye & Za-mani (2024) propose a data-driven methodology for syn-thesizing controllers for discrete-time dynamical systems based on grid-based sampling and Lipschitz continuity conditions. The objective is to design controllers that ensure a given region in the state space is visited only finitely often during the system evolution, with the num-ber of visits limited to at most l, a property expressed using the so-called l-universal co-B¨ uchi automata. Neural-network-based safety certificate synthesis has also attracted significant attention in recent years, even in settings where the system dynamics are known (Zhao et al. 2020, 2021, Lindemann et al. 2024, 2021, Zhang et al. 2023). This interest is primarily driven by two factors: (i) the training process is entirely data-driven, rendering neural networks well-suited for settings with unknown models, and (ii) neural networks possess uni-versal approximation capabilities for continuous func-tions (Hornik et al. 1989), thereby overcoming the limi-tations imposed by fixed certificate templates. A central challenge in employing such approaches, however, is the lack of formal out-of-sample performance guarantees. To tackle this, for instance, Zhao et al. (2020) en-code CBC constraints as a satisfiability modulo theory (SMT) problem (De Moura & Bjørner 2011) to verify the validity of the trained CBCs, while Jin et al. (2020) exploit Lipschitz continuity of the trained certificates for their correctness verification. Nevertheless, aside from requiring knowledge of system dynamics, such ap-proaches typically verify the trained CBCs a posteriori, which can be computationally costly. To bypass the need for a posteriori verification, as well as knowledge of system dynamics, for discrete-time un-known dynamical systems, Anand & Zamani (2023) in-tegrate the training and verification processes to ob-tain provably correct CBCs within a unified framework. In this approach, both the CBCs and the correspond-ing control policies are parameterized as neural net-works, which are learned jointly. Accordingly, Lipschitz continuity properties of neural networks (Fazlyab et al. 2019), as well as grid-based sampling, are leveraged to establish deterministic out-of-sample performance guar-antees. Furthermore, Nadali et al. (2025 a) encode CBC conditions using a mean-squared error loss function to obtain smoother gradients and improve the stability and convergence of neural network training. This approach yields CBC-based controllers for discrete-time unknown dynamical systems that, by exploiting specific Lipschitz continuity properties and grid-based sampling, deter-ministically guarantee system safety without requiring post hoc verification. Moreover, Kashani et al. (2026) explore the synthesis of barrier functions that charac-terize invariant sets for locally Lipschitz continuous un-known nonlinear systems, embedding safety guarantees directly into the training process while relying on grid-based sampling and Lipschitz continuity arguments to provide deterministic guarantees. Another aspect that neural-network-based approaches can address is the question of whether knowledge gained from synthesizing certificates and control policies in a given environment (the so-called source environment) can be transferred to a different but related environ-ment (the so-called target environment). To address this question, Nadali et al. (2023) propose a data-driven framework for unknown discrete-time dynamical sys-tems that leverages tools from transfer learning as a solution paradigm, enabling safety guarantees to be transferred from one system to another related sys-tem. This implies that the applicability of the proposed framework is limited to settings in which the source and target domains are sufficiently similar to permit com-parable control strategies. However, Nadali, Trivedi & Zamani (2024) argue that, in many practical scenarios, two systems may differ enough to preclude the use of identical control, yet still share a common logical con-trol structure, thereby enabling the transfer of safety guarantees through learning-based controller design. In particular, Nadali, Trivedi & Zamani (2024) propose incorporating inverse dynamics ( i.e. , a neural network that suggests the required action given a desired suc-cessor state) of the target system into the BC of the source system to provide formal safety guarantees. We 25 note that both of the aforementioned studies rely on conditions grounded in Lipschitz continuity assump-tions, together with grid-based sampling, to establish deterministic out-of-sample performance guarantees. Almost all studies surveyed in this section assume that all state variables of the system are directly measur-able. This assumption may limit their practical appli-cability, as it does not hold in many real-world sys-tems. To overcome this limitation, Jahanshahi & Zamani (2023 a) propose a data-driven approach for designing CBC-based safety controllers for unknown partially ob-servable discrete-time dynamical systems. In particular, this work assumes the availability of a state estimator with unknown dynamics but a known upper bound on the estimation error. Building upon this assumption and leveraging certain Lipschitz continuity conditions and grid-based sampling, deterministic safety guarantees are subsequently established. While most of the data-driven studies reviewed above do not explicitly exploit structural properties of dynam-ical systems (beyond certain Lipschitz continuity as-sumptions) and are therefore applicable to systems with general nonlinearities, many other works focus on more specific classes of systems. Before reviewing such ap-proaches, we first outline how these frameworks operate, particularly those based on data-parameterized system representations, by focusing on a widely studied subclass of the system in Definition 8, namely input-affine dy-namical systems with polynomial nonlinearities, as de-scribed in the following definition. 

Definition 11 A discrete-time input-affine nonlinear system with polynomial dynamics, denoted by Sp, evolves according to 

Sp : x+ = f (x) + Bu, (29) 

where B ∈ Rn×m is an unknown input matrix, x ∈ X de-notes the state vector, and u ∈ U represents the control input. Here, X ⊂ Rn and U ⊂ Rm denote the compact state and input sets, respectively. The polynomial map-ping f : X → Rn, satisfying f (𝟘 n) = 𝟘 n, characterizes the system dynamics and is assumed to be unknown. 

While the mapping f is assumed to be unknown, the re-lated literature typically imposes the following assump-tion on its structure. 

Assumption 2 A vector-valued polynomial function 

M : X → RM , satisfying M(𝟘 n) = 𝟘 M , referred to as a dictionary, is assumed to be known such that 

f (x) = AM(x) for some unknown constant matrix 

A ∈ Rn×M .

Remark 9 Assumption 2 is motivated by the observa-tion that, in many practical scenarios (e.g., electrical and mechanical systems), structural information about the system dynamics can often be derived from first princi-ples, which aligns naturally with the dictionary M(x).However, the system parameters, captured by the un-known matrices A and B, may remain unknown. This assumption is satisfied either when a dictionary M(x)

is available that contains all nonlinear terms appearing in the system dynamics (possibly including additional terms), or when an upper bound on the maximum degree of f (x) is known, enabling the construction of M(x) by including all monomials up to that degree. Notice that, since M(𝟘 n) = 𝟘 M , one can, without loss of generality, express M(x) as M(x) = ℵ(x)x, where ℵ : X → RM ×n

denotes a matrix-valued polynomial function, enabling all derivations to be carried out in terms of the state x in-stead of M(x), thereby simplifying the analysis (Samari et al. 2024). 

Remark 10 It is worth highlighting that, through As-sumption 2, f (x) is represented in a higher-dimensional feature space induced by the dictionary M(x), yielding a representation that is linear in the lifted features. A sim-ilar lifting procedure has also been extensively explored in the literature through approaches grounded in Koopman operator theory (Gadginmath et al. 2024, Haseli & Cort´ es 2022, Yu et al. 2022, Balim et al. 2023) and immersion-based methods (Wang & Jungers 2020, Wang, Jungers & Ong 2023). 

Upon Assumption 2 and Remark 9, the dynamics in (29) can be rewritten as 

Sp : x+ = A ℵ(x)x + Bu. (30) At the same time, by collecting a single set of input– state data from Sp (referred to as a single trajectory) as described in (10), and using the dictionary M(x), one can construct the data matrix 

D := 

h

M(x(0)) M(x(1)) . . . M(x(T − 1)) 

i

∈ RM ×T ,

(31) which is assumed to be of full row rank. Having in-troduced the required preliminaries, we now present a theorem that parameterizes the system dynamics using the data in (10) and (31), thereby providing a data-driven representation that serves as a replacement for the closed-loop system Sp (Samari et al. 2024). 

Theorem 8 Given the system Sp in Definition 11, let Assumption 2 hold. If there exists a matrix-valued poly-nomial function G : X → RT × n such that 

ℵ(x) = DG(x),

then, under the state-feedback control law u = K(x)x,with K(x) := IG(x), the system Sp admits the following 

26 data-based closed-loop representation: 

x+ = O+G(x)x. (32) Since the data-based closed-loop representation in (32) can be used on the left-hand side of (24c), many works in the literature have exploited approaches that param-eterize the system dynamics directly from collected data to derive safety guarantees. An immediate advantage of leveraging such approaches, compared with the previ-ously discussed scenario-based ones, is that input–state data collected along a single trajectory of the system typically suffices, thereby eliminating the need to repeat-edly reset the system to gather multiple datasets. In a related context, the work by Ahmadi et al. (2020) represents one of the early studies proposing a data-driven methodology for designing finite-horizon safety controllers for unknown continuous-time dynamical systems using input–state data collected from a single trajectory. In particular, Ahmadi et al. (2020) employ piecewise-polynomial approximations of the trajecto-ries, together with regularity side information, to con-struct a data-driven differential inclusion model capable of predicting trajectory evolution. Safety analysis is then carried out using BCs, followed by the synthesis of controllers that deterministically guarantee the safety over a finite horizon. In the continuous-time setting, Nejati et al. (2022) propose a data-driven framework for safety controller design for unknown nonlinear sys-tems with polynomial dynamics that provides deter-ministic guarantees and can also accommodate input constraints, albeit at the cost of introducing bilinearity. The work by Samari et al. (2024) presents a data-driven approach for safety controller design for nonlinear sys-tems with polynomial dynamics in the discrete-time setting, providing deterministic safety guarantees. The work by Gardner et al. (2025) introduces TRUST , an open-source tool for synthesizing safety-enforcing con-trollers (using the notion of CBCs), as well as stabilizing controllers, directly from data. The approach requires only input–state data collected along a single trajectory of a system with unknown linear and polynomial dy-namics, in both continuous- and discrete-time settings. Implemented as a user-friendly Python web application, 

TRUST employs sum-of-squares (SOS) optimization to construct CBCs from data. While the aforementioned studies cannot handle sys-tems with general nonlinear terms, Samari & Lavaei (2025) propose a data-driven framework for designing safety controllers for general nonlinear systems that of-fers deterministic finite-horizon safety guarantees. More concretely, by minimizing the effect of nonlinearities and capturing them via the parameter c in (24c), the safety guarantee becomes finite-horizon, thereby enabling the treatment of general nonlinear systems. Moreover, by leveraging the adding-one-integrator approach, Samari & Lavaei (2025) account for input constraints without introducing bilinearity; instead, the resulting frame-work yields dynamic safety controllers rather than conventional static state-feedback controllers. While previous studies primarily consider single-system set-tings, Esmaeili & Modares (2025) propose a data-driven approach to designing safety controllers, specifically tai-lored to motion planning tasks for homogeneous linear multi-agent systems operating in a shared, obstacle-filled workspace. The aforementioned studies assume direct measurement of all state variables of the dynamical systems, which may be restrictive in certain practical scenarios, as dis-cussed previously. To address this challenge, Jahanshahi & Zamani (2023 b) propose a data-driven framework for designing CBC-based safety controllers with determin-istic formal guarantees for continuous-time polynomial dynamical systems that are partially observable. Their approach assumes a polynomial-type estimator with par-tially unknown dynamics and a known upper bound on the estimation error and relies on collecting a single input–output trajectory from the system together with a single state trajectory from its estimator. In a related di-rection, for discrete-time linear dynamical systems, Ghi-asi & Kiumarsi (2025) present a data-driven approach formulated as a quadratically constrained quadratic pro-gram, which deterministically guarantees both safety, via the notion of CBFs, and stability using only input– output data, without assuming the availability of an esti-mator. In particular, an augmented system constructed from historical input–output measurements enables the data-driven formulation of CBFs. An almost inevitable scenario in practice, not consid-ered in the studies reviewed above, is that data collected from dynamical systems are corrupted by noise aris-ing from process disturbances or measurement imper-fections. Motivated by this practical challenge, several studies have investigated settings in which the available data are subject to noise. Within this line of work, build-ing upon the contribution by Alanwar et al. (2023) on computing reachable sets directly from noise-corrupted data for discrete-time dynamical systems, Oumer et al. (2025) propose a data-driven safety verification frame-work for unknown discrete-time linear dynamical sys-tems subject to process disturbances. The framework leverages matrix zonotopes and BCs to deterministically verify system safety directly from noise-corrupted input– state data. For the same class of dynamical systems and based on a single set of noise-corrupted input–state data, Modares et al. (2026) propose a data-driven framework for safe controller synthesis, with deterministic guaran-tees, that unifies direct and indirect learning by repre-senting the closed-loop dynamics through constrained matrix zonotopes. We note that the two previous studies fall within the class of data-driven approaches that de-rive data-parameterized system representations (cf. Sec-27 tion 2.3), a categorization that also applies to the liter-ature reviewed hereafter. Beyond linear dynamical systems, the problem of safe stabilization for partially unknown discrete-time input-affine nonlinear dynamical systems is studied by Zheng et al. (2024), where deterministic guarantees are pro-vided. Leveraging a set of noisy input–state data, Zheng et al. (2024) propose a data-driven approach to certify the existence of an (acausal) control policy capable of safely stabilizing all systems consistent with the col-lected data. Moreover, inspired by the work of Bisoffi et al. (2023), which leverages noise-corrupted data to de-sign controllers for discrete-time linear dynamical sys-tems with deterministic guarantees of robust invariance for a given polyhedral state set, Luppi et al. (2024) ad-dress the safe control problem for unknown input-affine polynomial systems in continuous time subject to pro-cess disturbances by designing robustly invariant sets and providing deterministic out-of-sample performance guarantees. Designing safety controllers with determin-istic guarantees from noise-corrupted input–state data for discrete-time input-affine nonlinear systems subject to process disturbances, without restricting the non-linear dynamics to polynomial forms, is also addressed by Modares et al. (2025), where safety specifications are expressed using polyhedral sets. By leveraging the concept of CBCs, Akbarzadeh, Ashoori & Lavaei (2025) propose a data-driven design of safety controllers for discrete-time input-affine dynam-ical systems with polynomial nonlinearities subject to process disturbances, providing deterministic infinite-horizon safety guarantees. For the same class of systems, Ashoori et al. (2025) offer a data-driven approach to designing CBC-based safety controllers capable of de-livering both deterministic infinite- and finite-horizon safety guarantees. The latter increases the likelihood of finding suitable CBCs and associated safety con-trollers. Moreover, inspired by the study by Niknejad & Modares (2024), which focuses on constructing robust invariant sets (see also the work by Wang & Jungers (2021)) under safety constraints for discrete-time linear dynamical systems, Ashoori et al. (2025) incorporate prior knowledge of the system into the data-driven de-sign, resulting in a meaningful reduction in the number of samples required for the design task. While the aforementioned studies are primarily tailored to delay-free systems, safety controller design for sys-tems with unknown models and time delays remains largely unexplored, with the exception of the recent work by Akbarzadeh et al. (2026). In particular, leveraging a single set of input–state data, corrupted by unknown-but-bounded noise, Akbarzadeh et al. (2026) propose a data-driven framework for designing CBC-based safety controllers for discrete-time input-affine polynomial sys-tems subject to both process disturbances and time-invariant delays, providing deterministic infinite-horizon safety guarantees. Notice that, since stability analysis and controller deign are not the primary focus of this survey, we refer interested readers to Rueda-Escobedo et al. (2022) (and the references therein) for data-driven approaches to designing stabilizing controllers for sys-tems with time delays. Although the aforementioned literature exploits certain structural properties of dynamical systems to obtain data-parameterized representations, as discussed in Sec-tion 2.3, another structural property that has recently attracted significant attention is the monotonicity of dynamical systems. In particular, monotone dynamical systems are endowed with the property that their tra-jectories preserve a natural partial order defined on the state space. As is well known, monotone dynamical sys-tems exhibit highly ordered transient and asymptotic behavior (Angeli & Sontag 2003, Sadraddini & Belta 2019, Saoud & Arcak 2024), making them particularly well suited for data-driven approaches, as their intrinsic structure helps mitigate challenges arising from limited or noisy data. Despite its demonstrated benefits, this im-portant structural property has not yet been thoroughly explored for the data-driven synthesis of safety certifi-cates, with only a few recent exceptions, which we review in the sequel. For discrete-time monotone dynamical systems, Alavi et al. (2025) propose a neural-network-based data-driven framework for safety verification using a finite number of samples, providing deterministic out-of-sample per-formance guarantees. Specifically, by embedding BCs into a higher-dimensional space, a new formulation for safety verification is introduced that is compatible with interval analysis, which is then employed for data-driven safety verification. Moreover, Alavi et al. (2025) estab-lish a connection between embedded BCs and neural net-works with positive weights and non-decreasing activa-tion functions, facilitating their learning through mono-tone neural architectures. The embedded BCs are rep-resented as the difference of two monotone neural net-works to enhance flexibility. It is demonstrated by Alavi et al. (2025) that, primarily due to leveraging this struc-tural monotonicity property, the proposed approach re-quires significantly less data compared with methods re-lying on Lipschitz continuity assumptions, e.g. , the work by Nadali et al. (2023) reviewed previously. For the same class of dynamical systems considered by Alavi et al. (2025), Galarza-Jimenez et al. (2025) propose a data-driven framework for safety verification with deterministic correctness guarantees. Relying on multiple system trajectories, a family of monotone ba-sis functions is constructed that remains non-increasing along all trajectories. Using this class of basis functions, a sampling-based optimization approach is developed to synthesize BCs and verify system safety with determin-istic guarantees, without relying on Lipschitz continuity assumptions. 28 Most of the existing data-driven literature based on structural property-based methods focuses on con-structing quadratic CBCs from sufficiently rich data for specific classes of nonlinear systems. Motivated by these developments, we propose the following research avenue as a promising direction for future work. 

Research Avenue 3 Given the general nonlinear system Sg in Definition 8, develop a data-driven ap-proach based on a single non-i.i.d. trajectory of the system to synthesize a more general non-quadratic CBC together with its safety controller while simulta-neously enforcing input constraints. 

Most of the studies grounded in the notion of CBCs surveyed in this subsection primarily provide infinite-horizon safety guarantees, i.e. , c = 0 is considered in condition (24c) (cf. Remark 6). This implies that the value of a CBC should be non-increasing along system trajectories, which may introduce conservatism and be-come restrictive in certain practical scenarios. As dis-cussed in Section 1.3 and motivated by this challenge, the literature proposes the use of k-inductive CBCs (or 

k-inductive BCs for safety verification), which relax this requirement. We review this notion in the subsequent subsection. 

4.2 k-Inductive (Control) Barrier Certificates 

To highlight the differences between conventional CBCs and their k-inductive counterparts, we introduce k-inductive control barrier certificates in the following def-inition, adapted from the work by Anand et al. (2021). 

Definition 12 Consider the system Sg as in Defini-tion 8, with the initial set X0 ⊂ X and the unsafe set 

Xu ⊂ X. A function Bk : X → R is considered as a k-inductive control barrier certificate ( k-CBC) for the sys-tem Sg if there exist k ∈ N≥1, ck ∈ R≥0, and ηk, γ k ∈ R,with ηk + ( k − 1) ck < γ k, such that 

• ∀ x ∈ X0:

Bk(x) ≤ ηk, (33a) 

• ∀ x ∈ Xu:

Bk(x) ≥ γk, (33b) 

• ∀ x ∈ X, ∃u ∈ U, such that 

Bk(f (x, u )) ≤ Bk(x) + ck, (33c) 

Bk(f k(x, u )) ≤ Bk(x). (33d) Before comparing CBCs and k-CBCs, we first present the following theorem, which provides safety guarantees based on the notion of k-CBCs (Anand et al. 2021). 

Theorem 9 Given Sg in Definition 8, let Bk be its k-CBC in the sense of Definition 12. Then, Sg is safe over an infinite-time horizon, meaning that all state trajecto-ries originating from X0 remain outside the unsafe set 

Xu for all time (i.e., xx0u(k) /∈ Xu for all x0 ∈ X0 and all k ∈ N), under the control input u corresponding to 

k-CBC Bk.

As is evident, the most important distinction between CBCs and k-CBCs is that the latter can ensure infinite-horizon safety guarantees even when ck̸ = 0, whereas the former requires c = 0 to provide such guarantees. In this sense, the k-CBC notion can be viewed as a re-laxation of the conventional CBC. More concretely, to obtain infinite-horizon safety guarantees via CBCs, the value of the CBC should be non-increasing along sys-tem trajectories. In contrast, k-CBCs relax this require-ment by permitting up to k − 1 one-step increases, while enforcing a non-increasing property over every k con-secutive steps. We note that when k = 1 and ck = 0, the notion of k-CBCs coincides with that of CBCs with 

c = 0. We note that while k-CBCs can be leveraged to design safety controllers, k-inductive barrier certificates (k-BCs) can be employed for safety verification (analo-gous to the distinct usage of BCs and CBCs). Despite the advantages offered by k-CBCs, their syn-thesis is generally more demanding than that of conven-tional CBCs, particularly in data-driven settings where the system dynamics are (partially) unknown. In partic-ular, as in the case of CBCs, the unknown dynamics ap-pear in condition (33c), but this is not the only challenge. More importantly, due to the structure of the left-hand side in condition (33d), the problem of synthesizing k-CBCs becomes inherently nonconvex, which makes the development of data-driven synthesis approaches partic-ularly challenging. Accordingly, only a limited number of works have addressed the data-driven synthesis of k-CBCs. Within this context, Murali et al. (2022) propose a data-driven approach based on an i.i.d. sampling scheme for synthesizing k-BCs for discrete-time dynamical systems, providing probabilistic out-of-sample performance guar-antees. In particular, for a prescribed confidence level and under certain Lipschitz continuity assumptions, Mu-rali et al. (2022) formulate a scenario-based program whose solution, grounded in the notion of k-BCs, yields probabilistic safety guarantees. To move beyond safety verification and enable safety controller synthesis using the notion of k-CBCs, Wooding & Lavaei (2024 b) ex-ploit structural properties of the system and propose a data-driven framework for a class of discrete-time input-affine nonlinear dynamical systems (with matched non-linearities). Specifically, the approach relies on noise-free input–state data collected along a single trajec-tory to construct a data-parameterized representation of the system, which is subsequently employed for con-troller design, yielding deterministic out-of-sample per-29 formance guarantees (cf. Section 2.3). From the above review, it follows that the literature on data-driven synthesis of k-BCs and k-CBCs remains relatively limited, leaving several promising directions for future research, including the treatment of noise-corrupted data, which is formally stated below. 

Research Avenue 4 Given the system Sg as in Def-inition 8, develop a data-driven approach for synthe-sizing safety certificates, using the notion of k-CBCs, that can accommodate noise-corrupted data while pro-viding formal out-of-sample performance guarantees. 

We note that Research Avenue 4 represents only one possible direction for future research in this area; other potential avenues include accommodating systems sub-ject to process disturbances. In the next subsection, we review another class of func-tional certificates that is more naturally suited to prop-erties beyond safety, such as liveness and ω-regular spec-ifications (Baier & Katoen 2008). 

4.3 (Control) Closure Certificates 

In this section, we first aim to clarify the main ideas and key features behind closure certificates (CCs). For sim-plicity of exposition, we restrict the discussion to BCs and CCs. Broadly speaking, BCs are natural and effec-tive tools for safety verification as they are constructed to characterize inductive state invariants, i.e. , sets of states that contain all reachable behaviors while remaining dis-joint from unsafe ones. While this state-based viewpoint has also been extended to richer temporal objectives, its use beyond safety, e.g. , for liveness or ω-regular prop-erties, is inherently conservative (Murali et al. 2024). A typical example of such properties is the requirement that a system visit a given set of states infinitely often. Although safety can be established via an inductive argument, liveness requires the development of a well-foundedness reasoning (Cook 2009). In this context, Podelski & Rybalchenko (2004) introduce the notion of transition invariants as a set of pairs of states such that the second state may be reachable from the first, thereby providing a superset of the transitive closure of the transition relation governing the system evolu-tion. Leveraging these transition invariants, one can develop a well-foundedness argument to refute liveness properties in the context of proving program termina-tion (Podelski & Rybalchenko 2004). Moreover, it is demonstrated by Podelski & Rybalchenko (2004) that how transition invariants can be utilized to verify pro-grams against ω-regular properties, which form an ex-pressive and well-behaved class of formal specifications capturing linear-time properties. Inspired by this perspective, Murali et al. (2024) intro-duce the notion of CCs as functional transition invari-ants for the verification of dynamical systems against ω-regular properties. Formally, a CC is a real-valued func-tion defined over pairs of states of the system. Consider the states x, x′, and x′′ , with x′ being the immediate successor of x. As a base case, the CC is required to be nonnegative for every pair ( x, x ′). Moreover, if the CC is nonnegative for the pair ( x′, x ′′ ), then it should also be nonnegative for the pair ( x, x ′′ ). Taken together, these conditions ensure that whenever the state x′′ is reach-able from the state x, the CC takes a nonnegative value on the pair ( x, x ′′ ). Additional constraints can then be imposed on this construction in order to verify safety, refute liveness, or establish ω-regular properties of inter-est (Nadali, Murali, Trivedi & Zamani 2024). We note that, whereas CCs are suited to verifying whether a sys-tem satisfies a given ω-regular property, control closure certificates can be employed for controller synthesis to enforce such properties. Despite the advantages offered by CCs, their synthesis remains challenging even in the model-based setting; it becomes significantly more demanding when the system models are unknown. This problem has been addressed in two recent studies by Nadali, Murali, Trivedi & Za-mani (2024) and Iraji et al. (2025). More specifically, Nadali, Murali, Trivedi & Zamani (2024) propose a data-driven approach tailored to discrete-time unknown dy-namical systems, in which a neural network is trained to represent a CC for the unknown system. The proposed approach relies on grid-based sampling (cf. Fig. 6(b)) and exploits certain Lipschitz continuity conditions to ensure the correctness of the learned CC beyond the ob-served data. For the same class of systems, Iraji et al. (2025) propose a data-driven approach for constructing CCs, offering either PAC guarantees based on i.i.d. sam-pling (cf. Section 2.1) or deterministic correctness guar-antees via grid-based sampling, combined with certain Lipschitz continuity assumptions (cf. Section 2.2). No-tably, the former type of guarantee requires fewer sam-ples compared with the approach by Nadali, Murali, Trivedi & Zamani (2024). The majority of the existing data-driven approaches, surveyed in this paper, assume access to full-state in-formation. In practice, however, many systems are only partially observable, with measurements available from a limited set of sensors rather than the complete system state. Motivated by this practical scenario, we propose the following research avenue. 

Research Avenue 5 For a dynamical system evolv-ing in either discrete or continuous time, develop a data-driven scheme for constructing either (in)finite abstractions or functional certificates using only input–output data collected from a partially observed system, without requiring access to the full system state. 

30 To conclude this section, it is worth noting that the data-driven functional certificate approaches surveyed here, as well as the data-driven abstraction-based methods re-viewed in Section 3, are primarily tailored to single dy-namical systems, often of relatively low dimension, and are therefore not directly applicable to large-scale inter-connected networks comprising numerous subsystems. This crucial observation naturally raises a valid ques-tion: how can such data-driven approaches be extended to accommodate large-scale interconnected networks? In the subsequent section, we focus on solution paradigms proposed in the literature to address this challenge. 

5 Deterministic Setting: Data-Driven Compo-sitional Techniques 

In this section, we provide a comprehensive overview of data-driven abstraction-based and functional-certificate-based approaches that can be applied to large-scale interconnected networks. Before reviewing such approaches, we first clarify that why the data-driven studies surveyed previously cannot be directly applied to such networks, thereby highlighting the pri-mary challenges 4 . We first focus on the first two general data-driven methodologies discussed in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. Recall that these two data-driven frameworks rely on i.i.d. sampling and grid-based sampling, respec-tively. Consequently, both approaches require multiple system initializations, and as the system dimension in-creases, the number of decision variables to be designed grows (at least linearly). Consequently, applying the i.i.d. sampling framework to large-scale networks would require collecting a substantially large amount of data, which becomes extremely burdensome due to the need for multiple system initializations. This issue becomes even more challenging when employ-ing approaches that utilize certain Lipschitz continuity conditions (cf. Section 2.2). Such approaches typically exhibit exponential sample complexity with respect to the system dimensions. Consequently, if these methods were to be applied to large-scale networks, the number of required samples, and thus the number of system ini-tializations, would grow prohibitively large, essentially rendering their application to high-dimensional systems impractical. We further highlight that both i.i.d. sampling and grid-based sampling frameworks, whether used in data-driven abstraction-based or functional-certificate-based methodologies, typically require solving linear pro-grams ( e.g. , the SCP (2)), whose number of constraints  

> 4We remark that even in the model-based setting, these approaches cannot be directly applied to large-scale networks due to the substantial computational complexity related to high dimensionality.

grows with the number of samples. While linear pro-grams are generally scalable, in the case of large-scale interconnected networks, the resulting optimization problems may become computationally intractable due to the excessive number of constraints. Collectively, these considerations indicate that the aforementioned data-driven frameworks cannot be directly applied to networks composed of a large number of subsystems. In contrast, the third general data-driven framework in Section 2.3, which exploits non-i.i.d. time-series data col-lected from the system during a single finite-time exper-iment (cf. the data in (10)), allows for the collection of large amounts of data from the entire network without requiring multiple system initializations. However, for large-scale networks, the primary challenge shifts to the solution paradigm, as such approaches typically involve solving data-dependent SOS optimization programs (for systems with polynomial dynamics) or data-dependent semidefinite programs (SDPs). It is well known that SOS-based methods do not scale well and can rarely be applied to systems with more than 10 state variables. Al-though SDP-based approaches are generally more scal-able than SOS-based ones, they also tend to become computationally intractable for systems with more than a few hundred state variables (Zhang & Lavaei 2018). Collectively, these observations indicate that even the third general data-driven framework faces severe scala-bility limitations and thus cannot be directly applied to large-scale interconnected networks. To address this scalability challenge and extend the previously reviewed data-driven abstraction-based and functional-certificate-based approaches to large-scale interconnected networks, compositional techniques can be employed. Broadly speaking, these techniques de-compose an interconnected network into smaller sub-systems, collect samples at the subsystem level, and es-tablish data-dependent conditions under which analyses and out-of-sample performance guarantees obtained for the individual subsystems can be systematically lifted to the entire network. More specifically, abstraction-based compositional methods aim to obtain an (in)finite abstraction of the entire network by first building each subsystem’s abstraction and establishing a formal be-havioral relation between every subsystem and its ab-straction ( e.g. , see Definition 3) in a data-driven man-ner. These local data-driven abstractions and relations are then combined to obtain a global abstraction for the network together with its overall behavioral relation. In the compositional variant of functional certificate ap-proaches, the objective is instead to construct a global functional certificate ( e.g. , a CBC as in Definition 9) and a controller for the entire network by systemati-cally combining the data-driven certificates and local controllers of the subsystems. As noted in Section 1.2, compositional techniques mainly rely on small-gain ar-guments (Dashkovskiy et al. 2010, Mironchenko 2023) or dissipativity-based reasoning (Arcak et al. 2016). 31 We now elaborate on how each compositional reason-ing operates. To this end, consider a large-scale network composed of N ∈ N≥1 subsystems. Here, we denote a subsystem by Sli , where the subscript i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }

represents the ith subsystem. Since subsystems within an interconnected network influence one another, the dynamics in (9) should be modified as 

Sli : x+ 

> i

= Aixi + Biui + Diwi, (34) where the term Diwi captures the influence of the other subsystems on Sli . In particular, Di denotes the inter-nal input matrix, and wi represents the internal input, 

i.e. , the input capturing the effect of other subsystems within the network. Notice that the definitions of un-known matrices Ai and Bi, as well as the state vector 

xi and control input ui with their corresponding sets, remain analogous to those in Definition 1, but are now specified for each subsystem individually. One of the key differences between small-gain and dissipativity-based arguments lies in how the intercon-nection is represented. Specifically, within the small-gain reasoning, Di and wi are typically partitioned as 

Di = [ Di1 . . . D i(i−1) Di(i+1) . . . D iN ], (35a) and 

wi = [ wi1; . . . ; wi(i−1) ; wi(i+1) ; . . . ; wiN ], (35b) where Dij ∈ Rni×nj and wij = xj if subsystem j influ-ences subsystem i; otherwise, Dij wij ≡ 𝟘 ni (wij = 𝟘 nj

and Dij = 𝟘 ni×nj ). Consequently, Di ∈ Rni×ζi and 

wi ∈ Wi ⊂ Rζi , with Wi being the internal input set and 

ζi = PN  

> j=1 , j ̸=i

nj .Within the dissipativity-type compositional reasoning, however, the partitioning is carried out in a different manner. In particular, under this framework, the inter-nal inputs are constructed as [w1; . . . ; wN ] = M [x1; . . . ; xN ], (36) where M = {mij }, i, j ∈ {1, . . . , N }, with mij ∈

R¯ζi×nj , denotes the coupling block matrix that char-acterizes the interactions among the subsystems and thus captures the network topology. It follows from this construction of the internal inputs that, in this case, 

Di ∈ Rni×¯ζi and wi ∈ ¯Wi ⊂ R¯ζi , with ¯Wi denoting the internal input set, and ¯ζi ∈ N≥1.To elaborate on how an interconnected network is formed, we use, with a slight abuse of notation, the same symbols as in Definition 1, emphasizing that they now refer to the network. Accordingly, given N ∈ N≥1

subsystems Sli , i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, with the internal in-put configuration either as in (35b) or in (36), their interconnection forms the interconnected network Sn,described by 

Sn : x+ = Ax + Bu, 

where x = [x1; . . . ; xN ] ∈ X := QN 

> i=1

Xi and 

u = [ u1; . . . ; uN ] ∈ U := QN 

> i=1

Ui are the state and control input of the network, with X and U denoting the state and control input sets. Moreover, A ∈ Rn×n,with n := PN 

> i=1

ni, is a block matrix, with diago-nal blocks ( A1, . . . , A N ) and off-diagonal blocks Dij ,

i, j ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, i ̸ = j, in the case of partitioning based on small-gain reasoning (see (35)), or with diago-nal blocks of ( A1 + D1m11 , . . . , A N + DN mN N ) and off-diagonal blocks of Dimij in the case of partitioning based on dissipativity-based reasoning (see (36)), and 

B = blkdiag (B1, . . . , B N ) ∈ Rn×m, with m := PN 

> i=1

mi.Since each subsystem is influenced by other (neighbor-ing) subsystems, this interaction should be explicitly taken into account when constructing (in)finite abstrac-tions of the subsystems or synthesizing functional certifi-cates for them. To illustrate this, consider the scenario in which one aims to synthesize a CBC, as in Definition 9, for the subsystem Sli in (34). In this case, an additional term should be included on the right-hand side of con-dition (24c) to capture the influence of the internal in-put wi. The specific form of this term differs depending on whether small-gain or dissipativity-based reasoning is employed. In particular, under small-gain reasoning, the additional term takes the form ξi∥wi∥2, where ξi ∈ R>0, typically referred to as the interaction gain. This quantity cap-tures the effect of the other subsystems on the ith sub-system for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , N } and essentially provides a degree of robustness against the internal input wi. In contrast, under dissipativity-based compositional rea-soning, this term is incorporated as 

"wi

xi

#⊤ "Z11  

> i

Z12 

> i

Z21  

> i

Z22 

> i

#| {z }

> Zi

"wi

xi

#

,

where Zi is a symmetric block matrix that should be designed. Notice that similar modifications are also re-quired in abstraction-based approaches. For instance, in the right-hand side of condition (15b), when employing small-gain reasoning, the term ξi∥wi − ˆwi∥2 should be included, where ˆ wi denotes the internal input of the ab-stract subsystem. Subsequently, in the small-gain framework, once the in-teraction gains ξi are computed in a data-driven manner, 32 a gain interconnection matrix is constructed. If the spec-tral radius of such a matrix is less than one (Dashkovskiy et al. 2010), the safety certificates and the associated controllers designed for the individual subsystems can be lifted to the entire network. In the dissipativity-based framework, on the other hand, a matrix incorporating both the network topology captured by M and the ma-trices Zi for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , N } is constructed. If such a matrix is negative semidefinite (Arcak et al. 2016), then the results obtained for the subsystems can be extended to the whole network. 

5.1 Literature on Data-Driven Compositional Tech-niques 

In the context of data-driven compositional techniques for abstraction-based approaches, Lavaei (2023 b) pro-poses a compositional framework grounded in small-gain reasoning to construct complete finite abstractions of large-scale interconnected networks while providing probabilistic out-of-sample performance guarantees. In particular, the proposed framework relies on i.i.d. sampling and exploits certain Lipschitz continuity con-ditions to eliminate the violation parameter; however, the resulting guarantee still involves a confidence level due to the i.i.d. sampling (cf. Section 2.2). Furthermore, Samari, Nejati & Lavaei (2026) present a compositional methodology for constructing complete finite abstrac-tions of large-scale interconnected networks, providing deterministic correctness guarantees by exploiting Lip-schitz continuity conditions and relying on grid-based sampling (cf. Section 2.2). Importantly, unlike the study by Lavaei (2023 b), the proposed approach does not re-quire knowledge of the network topology or the use of classical small-gain conditions. Despite these advancements, these approaches exhibit exponential sample complexity at the subsystem level when establishing formal out-of-sample performance guarantees. This limitation is characteristic of data-driven approaches that rely on Lipschitz continuity conditions, as discussed earlier. It is worth noting that no data-driven study has yet addressed the construction of infinite abstractions for large-scale interconnected networks, which therefore remains an open challenge. 

Research Avenue 6 Consider a large-scale inter-connected network consisting of N subsystems. De-velop a data-driven compositional framework for con-structing an infinite abstraction of the network, i.e., a ROM of the network, together with a formal SF-based relation between the ROM and the network, while pro-viding out-of-sample performance guarantees. 

Moving to data-driven compositional techniques for functional certificate approaches, based on dissipativity reasoning, Noroozi et al. (2021) present a data-driven framework for verifying the safety of interconnected networks, using the notion of BCs, with probabilistic guarantees. In particular, the approach relies on i.i.d. sampling and exploits Lipschitz continuity conditions to eliminate the violation parameter, thereby providing safety guarantees for the network that involve only a confidence level (cf. Section 2.2). In addition, Lavaei, Soudjani & Frazzoli (2023) and Lavaei, Di Lillo, Censi & Frazzoli (2022) develop data-driven frameworks based on dissipativity and small-gain reasoning, respectively, to verify the safety of large-scale networks including au-tonomous vehicles, while providing probabilistic safety guarantees that involve only confidence levels. While the previous data-driven studies assume that the number of subsystems is known a priori, the problem of data-driven synthesis of safety certificates through the notion of BCs has also been investigated for infinite net-works ( i.e. , extremely large networks with no fixed up-per bound on the number of subsystems). In particu-lar, leveraging Lipschitz continuity conditions and grid-based sampling, Aminzadeh et al. (2024) and Zaker, Ne-jati & Lavaei (2025 a) propose data-driven approaches for constructing BCs for infinite networks while provid-ing deterministic safety guarantees at the network level. Importantly, while Aminzadeh et al. (2024) assume that the interconnection topology is known, an assumption also adopted by Noroozi et al. (2021), Lavaei, Soudjani & Frazzoli (2023) and Lavaei, Di Lillo, Censi & Frazzoli (2022), the work by Zaker, Nejati & Lavaei (2025 a) does not require such knowledge, which is particularly suit-able for data-driven settings, where requiring less prior knowledge about the network is preferable. Despite these data-driven advancements, such ap-proaches exhibit exponential sample complexity at the subsystem level, motivating the development of frame-works that overcome this limitation. Moreover, they are primarily limited to safety verification for networks and do not address the synthesis of safety controllers. Moti-vated by these challenges, Akbarzadeh, Samari, Nejati & Lavaei (2025) and Akbarzadeh, Nejati & Lavaei (2025) exploit structural properties of networks, composed of input-affine nonlinear subsystems with polynomial dy-namics, and derive data-parameterized representations for the subsystems (cf. Section 2.3). These representa-tions are subsequently utilized to design CBCs and the corresponding safety controllers for each subsystem. Then, through small-gain compositional reasoning, the obtained CBCs and safety controllers are lifted to the network level, resulting in a global CBC and its asso-ciated safety controller for the entire network, thereby providing deterministic infinite-horizon safety guaran-tees. We note that this study requires a single set of input–state data collected from each subsystem, which contrasts with frameworks based on Lipschitz continuity conditions that require multiple subsystem initializa-tions. Moreover, the results by Akbarzadeh, Samari, Ne-jati & Lavaei (2025) can accommodate noise-corrupted data, which previous data-driven compositional studies cannot handle. 33 Research Avenue 7 For a large-scale network com-posed of N subsystems, develop a data-driven com-positional framework for constructing either abstrac-tions or functional certificates, where the interconnec-tion topology is not only unknown but also dynamic. 

Before concluding this section, we note that data-driven compositional methodologies have also been explored in the context of stability analysis for large-scale intercon-nected networks; see, e.g. , the studies by Zaker, Nejati & Lavaei (2025 b), Samari, Incremona, Ferrara & Lavaei (2025), Zaker et al. (2026), Lavaei & Angeli (2026, 2023) and Nakano et al. (2025). However, since the primary focus of this survey is on formal verification and synthe-sis with respect to specifications beyond stability, we do not review those studies. Having reviewed data-driven approaches for formal veri-fication and policy synthesis in deterministic settings, we now turn to their stochastic counterparts. Before doing so, it is worth emphasizing that many of the fundamen-tal ideas developed for deterministic systems, including abstraction-based reasoning, functional certificates such as barrier certificates, and compositional arguments, re-main central in the stochastic setting as well. The main distinction is that formal guarantees on system behav-ior are now expressed in terms of the probability mea-sures induced by the stochastic dynamics. For instance, the satisfaction of a desired specification is quantified as the probability that the corresponding system trajecto-ries satisfy that specification. This notion of probability should not be confused with the confidence levels that arise in data-driven finite-sample guarantees, which in-stead quantify the reliability of conclusions drawn from finite datasets rather than the likelihood of satisfying a given specification. 

6 Stochastic Setting: Data-Driven Abstraction-based Approaches 

This section provides a comprehensive review of abstraction-based techniques for stochastic dynamical systems. The primary focus is on the construction of fi-nite abstractions, given the extensive body of literature on this topic. To this end, we first introduce the class of discrete-time stochastic dynamical systems considered in this section. 

Definition 13 A discrete-time stochastic dynamical system Ssg evolves according to 

Ssg : x+ = f (x, u, ς ), (37) 

where x ∈ X denotes the system state, u ∈ U represents the control input, and ς is a sequence of i.i.d. random variables from a sample space Ω to the measurable space 

(Vς , Fς ):

ς := {ς(k) : (Ω , FΩ) → (Vς , Fς ), k ∈ N}.ˆu1, 0.12      

> ˆu1,0.23 ˆu1,0.33
> δ√2
> ˆX1
> ˆX2
> Fig. 7. Construction of a finite MDP for a stochastic dynam-ical system: the state and input spaces are partitioned into finitely many cells (with δdenoting the state discretization parameter), representative points are selected, and transition probabilities between cells are computed for each state–input pair; the figure only illustrates selected transitions.

Moreover, X ⊂ Rn is the Borel state space of the sys-tem, U ⊂ Rm is the Borel input space of the system, and f : X × U × Vς → Rn is an unknown measurable function characterizing the state evolution of the sys-tem. We denote by U the collection of input sequences 

{u(k) : Ω → U, k ∈ N}, in which u(k) is independent of ς(z) for any k, z ∈ N and z ≥ k. For any initial state 

x0 := x(0) ∈ X and input sequence u ∈ U, we denote by 

{xx0u(k)}k∈N the solution process of Ssg corresponding to the initial state x0 and the input sequence u.

Having introduced the system under consideration, we first elaborate on the construction of its finite abstrac-tion. For clarity of exposition, we first present the pro-cedure intuitively and then formalize it. To do so, let us first carry out the discussion in the model-based set-ting and then highlight the associated challenges and outline potential solution frameworks for transitioning to data-driven settings. Similar to the deterministic set-ting discussed in Section 3.2, the construction of a finite abstraction begins by partitioning the state and input spaces into finitely many regions, denoted by X = ∪iXi

and U = ∪iUi, respectively. We then select representa-tive points ˆ xi ∈ Xi and ˆ ui ∈ Ui, which serve as the dis-crete ( i.e. , abstract) states and control inputs. Similar to Section 3.2, we denote the finite abstraction of the sys-tem Ssg by ˆSsg . Accordingly, the sets of discrete states and inputs are defined as ˆX := {ˆxi | i = 1 , . . . , n ˆx} and ˆU := {ˆui | i = 1 , . . . , n ˆu}, respectively. One of the main differences in constructing a finite ab-straction of a stochastic system, compared with a de-terministic one, is that, due to inherent randomness in the dynamics, the successor state may fall into differ-ent partitions even when starting from the same discrete state and applying the same discrete input. Accordingly, one should compute the probability of transitioning to each partition given a discrete state and input, and, by repeating this for all state–input pairs, obtain a transi-34 ˆx1 ˆx2

ˆx3

p3

p2

p1

a1 ≤ p1 ≤ b1

a2 ≤ p2 ≤ b2

a3 ≤ p3 ≤ b3

ai, b i ∈ [0 , 1] 

i ∈ { 1, 2, 3}Fig. 8. Illustration of an IMC. 

tion probability matrix that defines a finite Markov deci-sion process (MDP) (Lavaei, Soudjani, Abate & Zamani 2022); see also Fig. 7. It is worth noting that the pro-cedure for constructing finite abstractions remains the same for stochastic dynamical systems without control inputs, with the key distinction that the resulting model reduces to a finite Markov chain (MC), rather than an MDP, since transitions depend only on the state and not on inputs (Lavaei, Soudjani, Abate & Zamani 2022). Another approach to constructing finite abstractions of a stochastic system is to build interval Markov deci-sion processes (IMDPs), where lower and upper bounds on transition probabilities are computed instead of ex-act values. While the construction of IMDPs is gener-ally more computationally expensive than that of finite MDPs, as both lower and upper bounds on transition probabilities should be computed, IMDPs offer notable advantages, particularly when enforcing infinite-horizon specifications (Lavaei, Soudjani, Abate & Zamani 2022). Similar to the above discussion, in the absence of control inputs, IMDPs reduce to interval Markov chains (IMCs), an example of which is depicted in Fig. 8. Akin to the deterministic setting, finite abstractions of stochastic systems, whether represented as finite MDPs or IMDPs, can be employed for the verification and enforcement of complex specifications. More precisely, they enable the quantification of the probability of sat-isfying a specification of interest and, when control in-puts are available, the synthesis of policies that max-imize this probability, typically via dynamic program-ming techniques based on Bellman equations (Lavaei, Khaled, Soudjani & Zamani 2020). We now aim to formalize the above discussion. For the system Ssg , its finite MDP can be represented as ˆSsg : ˆ x+ = ˆf (ˆ x, ˆu, ς ), (38) where ˆf : ˆX × ˆU × Vς → ˆX, with ˆX and ˆU denoting the finite state and input sets of ˆSsg . The transition ˆf is characterized as ˆf (ˆ x, ˆu, ς ) = Π( f (ˆ x, ˆu, ς )) ,

with Π : X → ˆX denoting the quantization map that assigns to each x ∈ X a representative point ˆ x ∈ ˆX

of the corresponding partition set containing x. Similar to the complete abstraction in the deterministic setting, the map Π satisfies 

∥Π( x) − x∥ ≤ δ, ∀x ∈ X, 

where δ is the state discretization parameter, as intro-duced in Definition 4. For simplicity, we assume here that the output of Ssg is the state itself, i.e. , y = Cx 

with C = In; the same assumption applies to ˆSsg .Having described the definition of ˆSsg , we now elaborate on how to establish a relation between Ssg and ˆSsg that enables the systematic transfer of results derived for ˆSsg 

to Ssg . This relation can be established via the notion of stochastic simulation functions (S-SFs), which serve as the stochastic counterpart of SFs in the determin-istic setting, introduced in Definition 3 (Lavaei, Soud-jani, Abate & Zamani 2022). For simplicity, we adopt the same notation for S-SFs and their associated param-eters as for SFs; however, the intended meaning will be clear from the context. 

Definition 14 Consider a stochastic system Ssg in (37) 

and its finite MDP ˆSsg in (38) . A function S : X ×

ˆX → R≥0 is called a stochastic simulation function (S-SF) from ˆSsg to Ssg if there exist constants αs ∈ R>0,

ρs, ψ s ∈ R≥0, and 0 < κ s ≤ 1 such that 

• ∀ x ∈ X, ∀ˆx ∈ ˆX, αs∥x − ˆx∥2 ≤ S(x, ˆx), (39a) 

• ∀ x ∈ X, ∀ˆx ∈ ˆX, ∀ˆu ∈ ˆU , ∃u ∈ U, such that 

ES(f (x, u, ς ), ˆf (ˆ x, ˆu, ς )) | x, ˆx, u, ˆu

≤ κsS(x, ˆx) + ρs ∥ˆu∥2 + ψs. (39b) Analogous to the notion of SFs, S-SFs establish a (prob-abilistic) relationship between the output trajectories of two systems, namely Ssg and ˆSsg (recall that here we assume y = x and ˆ y = ˆ x). The expectation operator is applied to the left-hand side of condition (39b) with re-spect to the stochastic noise, since the future evolution of the system is random, i.e. , condition (39b) is required to hold in expectation over one-step transitions. In order to construct an S-SF, the stochastic system Ssg 

is required to be endowed with a property analogous to 35 that given in Definition 5. For completeness, we present this property in the following definition (Lavaei, Soud-jani, Abate & Zamani 2022). 

Definition 15 The system Ssg is called incrementally input-to-state stable ( δ-ISS) if, for some constants α, α ∈

R>0, ρ ∈ R≥0, and 0 < κ < 1, there exists a function 

S : X × X → R≥0 such that 

• ∀ x, x ′ ∈ X, α∥x − x′∥2 ≤ S(x, x ′) ≤ α∥x − x′∥2, (40a) 

• ∀ x, x ′ ∈ X, ∀u, u ′ ∈ U, 

ES(f (x, u, ς ), f (x′, u ′, ς )) | x, x ′, u, u ′

≤ κ S(x, x ′) + ρ ∥u − u′∥2. (40b) Definition 15 ensures that the expected distance between the state trajectories, measured by the function S, re-mains bounded with respect to ρ ∥u − u′∥2. This def-inition is essential for bounding the expected distance between two solution processes, originating from differ-ent initial conditions and evolving under different input trajectories, via the notion of S-SFs. Having introduced S-SFs and the conditions required for their construction, we now present the formal guarantee quantifying the probabilistic closeness between the state trajectories of Ssg and ˆSsg (Lavaei, Soudjani, Abate & Zamani 2022). 

Theorem 10 Let S be an S-SF from ˆSsg to Ssg . For any input trajectory ˆu ∈ ˆU that preserves the Markov property of the closed-loop system ˆSsg , and for any ini-tial conditions x0 ∈ X and ˆx0 ∈ ˆX, one can construct a corresponding input trajectory u ∈ U for Ssg via the interface function associated with S, such that 

P

n

sup 

> 0≤k≤T

∥xx0u(k) − ˆxˆx0 ˆu(k)∥ < υ | x0, ˆx0

o

≥ 1 − φ, 

(41) 

where, if 0 < κ s < 1:

φ := 

(1−(1 − S(x0,ˆx0) 

> αsυ2

)(1 − ϕs 

> αsυ2

)T, if αsυ2 ≥ ϕs 

> 1−κs

,

( S(x0,ˆx0) 

> αsυ2

)κTs +( ϕs

> (1 −κs)αsυ2

)(1 −κTs ), if αsυ2 < ϕs 

> 1−κs

,

(42a) 

whereas, if 0 < κ s ≤ 1:

φ := S(x0, ˆx0) + ϕsTαsυ2 , (42b) 

with ϕs := ρs∥ˆu∥2 

> ∞

+ ψs and υ ∈ R≥0.

We provide three important remarks on this result. First, although the bound in (42a) is slightly tighter than that in (42b), the latter is often more attractive in practice, as it allows κs = 1, thereby facilitating the satisfaction of condition (39b). Second, the guarantee provided in (41) holds over a finite time horizon [0 , T ], making it particu-larly suitable for finite-horizon specifications. If ϕs = 0, the guarantee can be extended to the infinite-horizon case, with φ := S(x0,ˆx0) 

> αsυ2

, i.e. ,

P

n

sup 

> 0≤k< ∞

∥xx0u(k)− ˆxˆx0 ˆu(k)∥ < υ | x0, ˆx0

o

≥ 1− S(x0, ˆx0)

αsυ2 .

(43) Third, the guarantees in (41) and (43) are specification-free, meaning that, regardless of the specification sat-isfied by the finite abstraction, these bounds provide a probabilistic guarantee on the closeness between the state (or, more generally, output) trajectories of the two systems, either over a finite-time horizon or over an infinite-time horizon. To leverage such guarantees in a data-driven setting, one should first construct the finite abstraction from data, which requires computing the transition probability ma-trix directly from data; this is the first main challenge in developing data-driven abstraction-based approaches for stochastic systems. Moreover, once such an abstrac-tion is constructed, one should still establish an S-SF as in Definition 14 from data, since the system dynamics are unknown. While this difficulty already arises in the deterministic setting, the stochastic nature of the sys-tem introduces an additional layer of complexity in the data-driven case due to the expectation operator appear-ing in (39b). Addressing this issue typically requires re-placing the expectation term with its empirical approx-imation computed from data. Nevertheless, to preserve formal guarantees, it is necessary to rigorously quantify the discrepancy between the true expectation and its empirical approximation, typically using concentration inequalities such as Chebyshev’s inequality (Hern´ andez 2001). This, in turn, introduces an additional probabilis-tic layer, corresponding to the confidence level under which the bound on the discrepancy between the true expectation and its empirical approximation holds. The first challenge, i.e. , constructing finite (I)MDPs from data, can be addressed using approaches based on Chernoff bounds (Chernoff 1952) or by employing maximum likelihood estimation methods (Myung 2003) to estimate the parameters of the underlying probabil-ity distributions from observed data (Lavaei, Soudjani, Frazzoli & Zamani 2023). We primarily focus on how the second and third challenges can be addressed in a data-driven manner, while stressing that alternative approaches have also been proposed in the literature to tackle the first challenge. 36 To elaborate on how the literature typically addresses the second and third aforementioned challenges, we present a general solution framework that can be suit-ably adapted to align with either of the two data-driven approaches described in Sections 2.1 and 2.2. For sim-plicity of exposition, we restrict our attention to the verification setting ( i.e. , neither the system nor its finite abstraction is endowed with control inputs). We first aim to formulate the problem of constructing an ROP. To this end, we fix a parameterized structure for the S-SF as S(x, ˆx, q) = Pr 

> j=1

qj pj (x, ˆx), where each p j (x, ˆx)is a basis function, and q = [q 1 . . . qr]⊤ ∈ Rr denotes the unknown coefficients to be designed. Accordingly, the construction of the S-SF as in Definition 14 can be formulated as the following robust optimization pro-gram (ROP): min [μ; d] μ (44a) s.t. max  

> j

{hj (x, ˆx, d )} ≤ μ, j ∈ { 1, 2}, ∀x ∈ X, ∀ˆx ∈ ˆX, 

(44b) 

d = [ αs; ψs; κs; q 1; q 2; . . . ; q r] ∈ Rr+3 ,αs ∈ R>0, μ ∈ R, ψ s ∈ R≥0, κ s ∈ (0 , 1] ,

where 

h1(x, ˆx, d ) = αs∥x − ˆx∥2 − S(x, ˆx, q) , (45a) 

h2(x, ˆx, d ) = ES(f (x, ς ), ˆf (ˆ x, ς ), q) | x, ˆx−κsS(x, ˆx, q) 

− ψs. (45b) To address the second challenge, arising from the pres-ence of unknown dynamics in condition (39b), we col-lect sample pairs of the form ( xzi , f (xzi , ς )), with each 

xzi ∈ X, for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, corresponding to a sce-nario. Consequently, the scenario optimization program (SOP) corresponding to the ROP (44) can be formulated as min [μ; d] μ (46a) s.t. max  

> j

{hj (xzi , ˆx, d )} ≤ μ, j ∈ { 1, 2}, (46b) 

∀xzi ∈ X, ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, ∀ˆx ∈ ˆX, d = [ αs; ψs; κs; q 1; q 2; . . . ; q r] ∈ Rr+3 ,αs ∈ R>0, μ ∈ R, ψ s ∈ R≥0, κ s ∈ (0 , 1] ,

with functions h1(xzi , ˆx, d ) and h2(xzi , ˆx, d ) as in (45) ( x

is replaced by xzi ). Given that the constraint associated with h2(x, ˆx, d ) is nonconvex, one can fix κs, after which the resulting optimization problems can be solved. While the SOP (46) addresses the second challenge, it still faces an additional difficulty, as a closed-form ex-pression for the expected value in h2(x, ˆx, d ) with re-spect to ς is still required. To address this, one can take ˆN i.i.d. samples from ς, denoted by ςl, l ∈ { 1, . . . , ˆN },for each xzi . Then, according to Chebyshev’s inequal-ity (Hern´ andez 2001), one has 

P

n

ES(f (xzi , ς ), ˆf (ˆ x, ς ), q) 

− 1ˆN

> ˆN

X

> l=1

S(f (xzi , ς l), ˆf (ˆ x, ς l), q) ≤ ¯ϵ

o

≥ 1 − ¯ε2,

(47) where ¯ ϵ ∈ R>0 and ¯ ε2 ∈ (0 , 1] denote the approxima-tion error and the confidence level corresponding to the empirical approximation, respectively. Consequently, the last challenge can be addressed by substituting the expected value in h2(xzi , ˆx, d ) with its empirical approximation, as in (47). The SOP (46) can be now updated by replacing h2(xzi , ˆx, d ) with ¯h2(xzi , ˆx, d ), which is defined as ¯h2(xzi , ˆx, d ) := 1ˆN

> ˆN

X

> l=1

S(f (xzi , ς l), ˆf (ˆ x, ς l), q) 

− κsS(xzi , ˆx, q) − ψs + ¯ ϵ. (48) It is worth noting that, since (48) incorporates the term ¯ϵ ∈ R>0, it introduces additional conservatism compared with h2(xzi , ˆx, d ), which is required to account for the error induced by the empirical approximation. Due to the introduction of a confidence parameter arising from the use of an empirical approximation of the expecta-tion term, the guarantee in (41) or (43) (without control inputs in the described approach) in the data-driven set-ting holds with a confidence level of at least 1 − ε2, i.e. ,

P

n

(41) or (43) holds 

o

≥ 1 − ε2. (49) Importantly, ε2 should account for ¯ ε2, which originates from the empirical approximation, but it may also in-clude additional terms depending on the data-driven ap-proach or the sampling strategy employed, i.e. , whether the N sample pairs are obtained via an i.i.d. sampling approach (cf. Fig. 6(a)) or a grid-based sampling ap-proach (cf. Fig. 6(b)). Equipped with an understanding of the challenges and the potential solution frameworks for developing data-driven abstraction-based methodologies for stochastic dynamical systems, we now proceed to provide a com-prehensive review of the corresponding literature. 

6.1 Literature on Data-Driven Abstraction-based Ap-proaches for Stochastic Systems 

In recent years, a variety of indirect and direct data-driven techniques have been proposed for constructing 37 finite abstractions of stochastic dynamical systems, addressing both verification and synthesis problems. Within the category of indirect data-driven approaches, Jackson et al. (2021) propose a framework for control synthesis of discrete-time, partially unknown, switched stochastic systems. In the proposed methodology, the unknown dynamics are first learned via GP regression, after which an IMDP abstraction is constructed and used for controller synthesis to maximize the probability of satisfying a given LTL specification over finite traces. Subsequently, Reed et al. (2023) and Reed & Lahijanian (2025) propose replacing standard GP regression with deep kernel learning for modeling the system dynam-ics, enhancing scalability and representational capacity for complex nonlinear stochastic systems, while simi-larly constructing an IMDP abstraction. In addition, Sch¨ on et al. (2024) propose a framework for unknown discrete-time stochastic systems without control inputs that, rather than relying on standard GPs, exploits the so-called binary-tree GP, whose piecewise-constant pos-terior mean and covariance naturally induce a partition of the state space. This feature facilitates the construc-tion of IMCs for the verification of infinite-horizon reachability specifications while providing probabilistic guarantees. More recently, Sch¨ on et al. (2025) propose an indirect framework based on parametric identifica-tion and robust simulation relations, where Bayesian regression is employed to compute a credible parameter set with a prescribed confidence level. In the context of direct data-driven approaches, Lavaei, Somenzi, Soudjani, Trivedi & Zamani (2020) propose a reinforcement-learning-based framework for the con-trol synthesis of unknown discrete-time stochastic con-trol systems, aiming to maximize the probability of sat-isfying a given specification, expressed as a syntacti-cally co-safe LTL formula, over a bounded time hori-zon. The proposed method abstracts the unknown sys-tem into a finite MDP with unknown transition prob-abilities, synthesizes a control strategy over this finite MDP, and subsequently refines it for the original sys-tem with approximate optimality guarantees. In addi-tion, Lavaei, Soudjani, Frazzoli & Zamani (2023) pro-pose a data-driven method, grounded in an SCP, for con-structing finite MDPs of unknown discrete-time stochas-tic systems, providing probabilistic closeness guarantees in the form of (49) for finite-horizon specifications. The proposed methodology relies on i.i.d. sampling and re-quires certain Lipschitz continuity conditions to ensure the validity of the guarantees (cf. Section 2.2). While the previous two studies are primarily tailored to finite-horizon specifications, the frameworks proposed by Nazeri, Badings, Soudjani & Abate (2025) and Naz-eri, Badings, Schmuck, Soudjani & Abate (2025) can be employed to enforce both finite- and infinite-horizon specifications. More precisely, Nazeri, Badings, Soudjani & Abate (2025) introduce a data-driven abstraction-based technique for unknown discrete-time Lipschitz continuous dynamical systems subject to additive stochastic noise. The approach leverages samples of the system dynamics to learn the enabled actions and tran-sition probabilities of the abstraction, represented as an IMDP, while providing PAC guarantees (cf. Section 2.1) on the probability of satisfying a specified control ob-jective. In a similar vein, the work by Nazeri, Badings, Schmuck, Soudjani & Abate (2025) extends the pre-vious framework by relaxing certain assumptions, as it does not require noise-free samples of the system dynamics and considers a broader class of stochastic systems in which the noise is not restricted to be ad-ditive. In a recent effort, Sa˘ glam et al. (2026) propose a direct data-driven abstraction-based approach for unknown discrete-time stochastic systems that com-bines online learning with incremental game-solving. Specifically, Sa˘ glam et al. (2026) learn under- and over-approximations of reachable sets from noisy data, under Lipschitz continuity and known bounded noise support, and use these to construct finite stochastic game graphs as abstractions for synthesizing policies that satisfy infinite-horizon temporal objectives almost surely. A common requirement across several direct data-driven studies reviewed here is the availability of Lipschitz constants, particularly for the stochastic system (Naz-eri, Badings, Soudjani & Abate 2025, Nazeri, Badings, Schmuck, Soudjani & Abate 2025, Sa˘ glam et al. 2026). In this direction, Zhang et al. (2024) develop theoretical results based on nonparametric estimation to compute asymptotic upper bounds for the Lipschitz constants of discrete-time stochastic systems. Building on these bounds, Zhang et al. (2024) construct IMDP abstrac-tions and employ them to verify temporal-logic specifi-cations, while also allowing synthesis in the presence of inputs. Despite the rich literature reviewed here, all these studies focus on constructing finite abstractions of discrete-time stochastic systems; a natural future direction is there-fore to investigate the data-driven construction of infi-nite abstractions, i.e. , ROMs, for stochastic dynamical systems. 

Research Avenue 8 Develop a data-driven ap-proach for constructing infinite abstractions (ROMs) of stochastic systems, together with their S-SFs, while providing out-of-sample performance guarantees. 

We note that while the work by Nadali et al. (2025 b)can potentially be viewed as a step toward Research Avenue 8, it does not directly address it. Specifically, this work proposes a data-driven framework for trans-ferring control between stochastic systems by learning a stochastic neural simulation function and an interface map, assuming a given lower-dimensional source system rather than constructing one, while providing infinite-horizon guarantees (cf. (49)) under grid-based sampling and Lipschitz continuity conditions. 38 Having discussed various aspects of data-driven abstraction-based approaches for stochastic dynamical systems, we now proceed to the next section, where we review data-driven functional certificate approaches for stochastic systems. 

7 Stochastic Setting: Data-Driven Functional Certificate Approaches 

This section presents functional certificate-based ap-proaches for stochastic systems, with a primary focus on stochastic control barrier certificates (S-CBCs). When the objective is verification rather than controller syn-thesis, the corresponding notion is stochastic barrier certificates (S-BCs). The use of S-CBCs yields a quan-titative guarantee expressed as a lower bound on the probability that the system trajectory remains within the safe region. In fact, safety guarantees derived from S-CBCs and S-BCs are intrinsically probabilistic, stem-ming from the noise present in the system dynamics. To enable the discussions in this section, let us again consider the system described in Definition 13. We now proceed to present the notion of S-CBCs. To this end, with a slight abuse of notation, we adopt the same sym-bols as those used for CBCs in Definition 9 to denote their stochastic counterparts. Nevertheless, the main dif-ferences between the definition of an S-CBC and that of a CBC are twofold: (i) in contrast to a CBC, an S-CBC is required to be a nonnegative function (essential for (52)), i.e. , B : X → R≥0, which in turn implies that 

η, γ ∈ R≥0 with γ > η , and (ii) condition (24c) should be reformulated to account for the stochastic dynamics, whereas conditions (24a) and (24b) remain unchanged. In particular, for the stochastic system Ssg introduced in Definition 13, condition (24c) is modified as 

• ∀ x ∈ X, ∃u ∈ U , such that 

EB(f (x, u, ς )) | x, u  ≤ κς B(x) + c, (50) for some constants c ∈ R≥0 and 0 < κ ς ≤ 1. With these modifications in place, one can derive a lower bound on the probability that Ssg remains within the safe region over a finite time horizon (Lavaei, Soudjani, Abate & Zamani 2022). In particular, for any initial con-dition x0 ∈ X0, the probability that the solution process of Ssg , under the input signal u associated with the S-CBC B, does not reach the unsafe set Xu over the time interval [0 , T ] is lower bounded by 1 − ϑ, i.e. ,

Pxx0u(k) /∈ Xu for all k ∈ [0 , T ] | x0 ∈ X0 ≥ 1 − ϑ, 

(51) where, if 0 < κ ς < 1: 

ϑ := 

(1 − (1 − ηγ )(1 − cγ )T, if γ ≥ c 

> 1−κς

,

( ηγ )κTς + ( c  

> (1 −κς)γ

)(1 − κTς ), if γ < c 

> 1−κς

,

(52a) whereas, if 0 < κ ς ≤ 1: 

ϑ := η + cT γ . (52b) Akin to the discussion in Section 6, the bound in (52a) is less conservative than that in (52b), as it provides a tighter probabilistic guarantee; however, the latter is more broadly applicable, since for some systems and dy-namics there may not exist a constant κς < 1 satisfying condition (50), which is required in (52a). The underlying safety guarantees can be extended to infinite-time horizons if c = 0, where ϑ := ηγ . More con-cretely, in this case, the guarantee (51) is modified to 

Pxx0u(k) /∈ Xu for all k ∈ [0 , ∞) | x0 ∈ X0 ≥ 1 − ηγ .

(53) We note that enforcing condition (50) with c = 0 is typically restrictive and, in certain scenarios, may pre-clude the existence of a valid S-CBC (Salamati et al. 2024). Allowing c > 0 relaxes this condition and in-creases the likelihood of constructing a valid S-CBC as a 

c-martingale certificate, albeit at the cost of restricting the safety guarantee to a finite-time horizon. To leverage the guarantee in (51) or (53), it is neces-sary to construct an S-CBC for the system Ssg . How-ever, condition (50) explicitly depends on the unknown system dynamics. In addition, the stochastic setting in-troduces a further layer of difficulty due to the presence of the expectation operator in (50). As detailed in Sec-tion 6, addressing this challenge typically requires esti-mating the expectation term via empirical approxima-tions, while employing concentration inequalities such as Chebyshev’s inequality (Hern´ andez 2001) to formal-ize this approximation at the cost of introducing a con-fidence level under which it holds. Hereafter, following the approach outlined in Section 6, we describe a systematic data-driven procedure to ad-dress these challenges, while emphasizing that alter-native data-driven approaches may also be employed. For simplicity of exposition, and in line with Section 6, we focus on the synthesis of an S-BC. Inspecting the RCP (26), and fixing the structure of an S-BC in a manner analogous to Section 4.1, it follows that the ROP corresponding to the synthesis of an S-BC can be 39 formulated as min [μ; d] μ (54a) s.t. max  

> j

{hj (x, d )} ≤ μ, j ∈ { 0, . . . , 4}, ∀x ∈ X, 

(54b) 

d = [ η; γ; c; κς ; κ; q 1; q 2; . . . ; q r] ∈ Rr+5 ,

κ ∈ R\R≥0, μ ∈ R, η, γ, c ∈ R≥0, κ ς ∈ (0 , 1] ,

where h1(x, d )– h3(x, d ) are defined analogously to those in (27), while h0(x, d ) enforces the nonnegativity of the S-BC and h4(x, d ) corresponds to condition (50), i.e. ,

h0(x, d ) = −B(x, q) ,h4(x, d ) = EB(f (x, ς ), q) | x − κς B(x, q) − c. (55) By collecting sample pairs of the form ( xzi , f (xzi , ς )), where each xzi , for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , N }, one can formulate the corresponding SOP as min [μ; d] μ (56a) s.t. max  

> j

{hj (x, d ), h 4(xzi , d )} ≤ μ, j ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3},

(56b) 

∀x ∈ X, ∀xzi ∈ X, ∀i ∈ { 1, . . . , N },d = [ η; γ; c; κς ; κ; q 1; q 2; . . . ; q r] ∈ Rr+5 ,

κ ∈ R\R≥0, μ ∈ R, η, γ, c ∈ R≥0, κ ς ∈ (0 , 1] .

To resolve the second challenge regarding the expected value in SOP (56), for each xzi , we draw ˆN i.i.d. samples of ς, denoted by ςl, l ∈ { 1, . . . , ˆN }. Consequently, by invoking Chebyshev’s inequality, one obtains 

P

n

EB(f (xzi , ς ), q) − 1ˆN

> ˆN

X

> l=1

B(f (xzi , ς l), q) ≤ ¯ϵ

o

≥ 1−¯ε2,

where ¯ ϵ ∈ R>0 denotes the approximation error and ¯ε2 ∈ (0 , 1] represents the confidence level associated with the empirical estimate. Accordingly, one can for-mulate an alternative SOP, analogous to (56), by re-placing h4(xzi , d ) in (56b) with its empirical counterpart ¯h4(xzi , d ), defined as ¯h4(xzi , d ) := 1ˆN

> ˆN

X

> l=1

B(f (xzi , ς l), q) − κς B(xzi , q) − c + ¯ ϵ. 

(57) Observe that, due to the presence of the term ¯ ϵ ∈ R>0

in (57), ¯h4(xzi , d ) is more conservative than h4(xzi , d ), so as to account for the approximation error introduced by replacing the expectation with its empirical estimate. Having addressed both challenges, it follows that, upon solving the SOP incorporating ¯h4(xzi , d ) and construct-ing an S-BC, the resulting safety guarantee takes the form 

P

n

PSsg ⊨ safety ≥ 1 − ϑ

o

≥ 1 − ε2, (58) where ε2 ∈ (0 , 1] denotes the overall confidence level. As detailed in Section 6, this quantity necessarily includes the term ¯ ε2 arising from the empirical approximation of the expectation, and may incorporate additional contri-butions depending on the specific data-driven method-ology and sampling scheme employed. We note that the inner probability in (58) reflects the stochastic nature of the system, which is present even in model-based set-tings, whereas the outer probability captures the confi-dence level induced by the use of data. While the details and descriptions presented here focus on S-BCs and S-CBCs, the same arguments extend naturally to other functional certificate frameworks. Another approach to constructing S-CBCs is to employ data-driven frameworks that exploit structural proper-ties of systems to derive data-parameterized representa-tions, as presented in Section 2.3, with suitable modifi-cations. More specifically, for Ssg in Definition 13, the system can be initialized at a given initial condition and driven by a sequence of arbitrary inputs over the time horizon [0 , T ], where T ∈ N≥1 denotes the experiment horizon, yielding 

Oi := 

h

x(0) xi(1) . . . xi(T − 1) 

i

, (59a) 

I := 

h

u(0) u(1) . . . u(T − 1) 

i

, (59b) 

O+i

:= 

h

xi(1) xi(2) . . . xi(T )

i

, (59c) 

Zi := 

h

ςi(0) ςi(1) . . . ςi(T − 1) 

i

, (59d) where i ∈ { 1, 2, . . . , ¯N }, with ¯N ∈ N≥1, indexes trajec-tories corresponding to different noise realizations Zi.We note that all trajectories in this setting originate from the same initial condition x(0) and evolve under the same input sequence I (Lavaei 2025), which ensures their comparability and enables consistent capture of the noise effect via its empirical mean. We emphasize that Zi is unknown and not measured. This modifica-tion enables the extension of the approach discussed in Section 2.3 to stochastic settings. It is worth noting that, in the continuous-time setting, the expectation operator in (50) is replaced by an in-finitesimal generator of the underlying stochastic sys-tem. This generator is a partial differential operator that encodes rich information about the evolution of the stochastic system. However, in data-driven settings where the system dynamics are unknown, the infinites-imal generator should be estimated from data. Similar to the discrete-time case, this estimation is accompanied 40 by a confidence level, thereby introducing an additional probabilistic layer in the resulting safety guarantees. We refer the interested reader to the work by Nejati, Lavaei, Soudjani & Zamani (2023) for a data-driven estimation of the infinitesimal generator from data. Owing to the need to estimate the infinitesimal generator from noisy measurements while accounting for the associated esti-mation error, the data-driven analysis and synthesis of 

continuous-time stochastic systems is considerably more challenging, motivating the following research avenue. 

Research Avenue 9 For a stochastic dynamical system evolving in continuous time and subject to both Brownian motion and Poisson processes, develop a data-driven framework exploiting system structural properties and a single trajectory of the system for constructing either (in)finite abstractions or func-tional certificates while formally estimating the corre-sponding infinitesimal generator from noisy measure-ments and providing probabilistic guarantees. 

7.1 Literature on Data-Driven Design of Functional Certificates for Stochastic Systems 

In recent years, there has been growing interest in data-driven functional certificate methodologies for stochas-tic dynamical systems. In this context, an indirect data-driven approach for synthesizing stochastic control bar-rier functions for continuous-time stochastic dynami-cal systems with unknown diffusion terms is proposed by Wang et al. (2022). The approach relies on i.i.d. sampling and yields infinite-horizon probabilistic safety guarantees. Indirect data-driven approaches for learning system dynamics via GP regression have also been con-sidered in the literature for the synthesis of S-BFs (Reed et al. 2025, Mazouz et al. 2024) and S-CBCs (Wajid et al. 2022). These works rely on i.i.d. sampling and provide probabilistic safety guarantees over finite-time horizons. Moreover, Wang, Zhan, Jiao, Wang, Jin, Yang, Wang, Huang & Zhu (2023) propose an indirect data-driven safe reinforcement learning framework for unknown con-tinuous stochastic systems, where a neural generative model of the environment is learned from trajectory data and subsequently used to synthesize S-BFs that enforce safety constraints over finite horizons. Several studies fall within the first two categories of di-rect data-driven approaches discussed in Section 2. In this regard, Salamati et al. (2021) propose a data-driven approach, based on the notion of S-BCs, for the formal safety verification of unknown discrete-time stochastic dynamical systems. The method relies on i.i.d. sampling and imposes certain Lipschitz continuity assumptions (cf. Section 2.2) in order to provide probabilistic finite-horizon safety guarantees. Subsequently, Salamati et al. (2024) extend the results of the aforementioned study and propose a data-driven approach that addresses both verification and synthesis problems. We note that the guarantees provided in both studies are expressed in the form of (58). In addition, Salamati & Zamani (2022 b), building on repetitive scenario design (Calafiore 2017), and Salamati & Zamani (2022 a), based on the wait-and-judge approach (Campi & Garatti 2018), propose data-driven methods that reduce sample complexity while providing probabilistic finite-horizon safety guarantees in the form of (58). A common limitation of the preced-ing four studies is the need to fix the certificate template a priori. To overcome this, Taheri & Zamani (2025) pro-pose a data-driven approach for safety controller syn-thesis in discrete-time stochastic systems with unknown dynamics, where both the S-CBC and the controller are represented by neural networks learned from data. By incorporating Lipschitz-based validity conditions into training, the approach ensures generalization beyond the samples and provides probabilistic finite-horizon safety guarantees with a desired confidence level. As another relevant work, Sch¨ on et al. (2024) use condi-tional mean embeddings (Klebanov et al. 2020) to verify safety of discrete-time stochastic systems via S-BCs by reformulating the conditions as a data-driven optimiza-tion problem and deriving distributionally robust guar-antees. The resulting SOS-based approach, combined with a GP envelope and i.i.d. sampling, provides proba-bilistic finite-horizon safety guarantees (similar to (58)). Within this line of work, Casablanca et al. (2026) pro-pose Lucid , a tool for certifying the safety of discrete-time unknown stochastic systems from finite data, which uses a finite Fourier kernel expansion to reformulate the problem as a tractable linear program, providing dis-tributionally robust probabilistic finite-horizon safety guarantees under i.i.d. sampling. More recently, Sch¨ on et al. (2026) extend this line of work from safety veri-fication to control synthesis using S-CBCs, addressing temporal logic specifications via Streett supermartin-gales (Abate et al. 2024) and providing probabilistic finite-horizon guarantees. As is evident from the earlier discussion, existing data-driven approaches for stochastic systems are limited and typically consider only process noise with i.i.d. prop-erties. To enhance the practical applicability of these methods, we propose the following research avenue. 

Research Avenue 10 For a stochastic dynamical system subject to both process and measurement noise, where the noise processes may be non-i.i.d., de-velop a data-driven framework for constructing ei-ther (in)finite abstractions or functional certificates while providing probabilistic out-of-sample perfor-mance guarantees. 

Within the third category of data-driven approaches, 

i.e. , those exploiting structural properties to obtain data-parameterized representations (cf. Section 2.3), Modares (2024) design probabilistic safe controllers for uncertain linear discrete-time systems directly from 41 data, ensuring safe-set invariance in probability. Ex-tending this perspective beyond linear dynamics, Es-maeili & Modares (2024) propose a direct data-driven risk-averse safe control framework for stochastic nonlin-ear parameter-varying systems, where gain-scheduling and nonlinear control components are learned from fi-nite data to enforce probabilistic set invariance with robustness to stochastic disturbances. The recent study by Lavaei (2025) introduces a data-driven framework for designing safety controllers via the notion of S-CBCs for discrete-time stochastic dynamical systems with polynomial dynamics, providing probabilistic finite-horizon safety guarantees directly from data collected along N different system trajectories (cf. data in (59)). In contrast to the previous two studies, the framework by Lavaei (2025) does not require rendering the entire safe set invariant in probability, but instead allows the initial set to be chosen as a subset of the safe set, which can lead to reduced conservativeness. 

8 Stochastic Setting: Data-Driven Composi-tional Techniques 

In this section, we provide an overview of data-driven compositional techniques for high-dimensional inter-connected networks of stochastic dynamical subsys-tems, covering both data-driven abstraction-based and functional-certificate-based approaches. The underlying principle of such compositional techniques is largely analogous to that discussed in Section 5. However, a key distinction arises due to the stochasticity present at the subsystem level: the corresponding analyses are proba-bilistic, which in turn induces probabilistic guarantees at the network level. In the realm of data-driven compositional techniques for abstraction-based approaches, Lavaei, Perez, Kazemi, Somenzi, Soudjani, Trivedi & Zamani (2023) propose a reinforcement-learning-based framework that implic-itly abstracts each discrete-time stochastic subsystem into a finite MDP with unknown transition probabilities. In a subsequent stage, following an assume–guarantee paradigm, control strategies are synthesized for finite MDPs using reinforcement learning and then refined to the original continuous-space network with approximate optimality guarantees. Accordingly, the final guarantee is expressed as a lower bound on the satisfaction proba-bility of the overall network, obtained by combining the probabilities of individual subsystems together with ad-ditional factors, including certain Lipschitz constants. Moreover, Lavaei (2023 a) presents a data-driven com-positional approach to constructing finite MDPs of un-known large-scale interconnected networks of discrete-time stochastic subsystems. The proposed framework exploits dissipativity properties of both the subsystems and their corresponding finite MDPs by leveraging the notion of stochastic storage functions. The approach re-lies on i.i.d. sampling (cf. Fig. 6(a)), together with cer-tain Lipschitz continuity conditions (cf. Section 2.2), and the resulting guarantees take the form of (49) for finite-horizon specifications. Importantly, while the types of guarantees provided by Lavaei, Perez, Kazemi, Somenzi, Soudjani, Trivedi & Zamani (2023) and Lavaei (2023 a)differ, the latter can, in general, yield less conservative guarantees for networks with a large number of subsys-tems, primarily due to the effectiveness of dissipativity-based compositional reasoning. Within the context of data-driven compositional tech-niques for functional certificate approaches, Lavaei, Soudjani & Frazzoli (2023) propose a data-driven frame-work for verifying the safety of large-scale networks using dissipativity-based compositional reasoning. More precisely, Lavaei, Soudjani & Frazzoli (2023) collect i.i.d. data from each unknown continuous-time stochastic subsystem and construct stochastic storage certificates for each subsystem. These certificates are then com-posed to obtain S-BCs for the overall interconnected network, which can be used to verify network safety while providing finite-time-horizon safety guarantees in the form of (58), whose out-of-sample correctness (with a predetermined confidence level) is ensured by leveraging certain Lipschitz continuity conditions (cf. Section 2.2). In a similar vein, Lavaei, Di Lillo, Censi & Frazzoli (2022) propose a data-driven methodology for the for-mal estimation of collision risks in autonomous vehicles (AVs) with discrete-time unknown stochastic dynam-ics, within a multi-agent framework. The approach involves collecting data from each AV using an i.i.d. sampling scheme, based on which, and by leveraging certain Lipschitz continuity conditions to ensure out-of-sample correctness (with a specified confidence level), a stochastic sub-barrier certificate is constructed for each agent. These certificates are then composed, using small-gain-based compositional reasoning, to synthesize the S-BC for the network of AVs, thereby enabling a formal estimation of the collision risk over a finite time horizon in the form of (58). 

9 Concluding Discussion 

In this survey, we have provided, to the best of our knowledge, the first unified and in-depth overview of data-driven formal methods for complex dynamical sys-tems, with particular emphasis on methodologies that provide rigorous formal guarantees for verification and controller synthesis against complex specifications be-yond stability. We have organized the rapidly growing literature around three main methodological pillars, namely abstraction-based techniques, functional certifi-cate approaches, and compositional methods, and have discussed them for both deterministic and stochastic 42 systems. In parallel, we have classified the main data-driven guarantees into three broad categories, namely 

(i) PAC/scenario-based guarantees, (ii) guarantees re-lying on Lipschitz continuity properties, and (iii) guar-antees exploiting structural properties of the underlying systems, such as data-parameterized representations or monotonicity. Through this organization, we have aimed to clarify the common principles, advantages, and limitations of a literature that is broad, technically diverse, and often fragmented across different commu-nities, while also highlighting several avenues for future research. The survey also highlights a recurring trade-off under-lying nearly all existing approaches. On the one hand, methods providing PAC guarantees are attractive due to their generality and flexibility. Nevertheless, they require i.i.d. sampling with multiple system initializa-tions, and their guarantees allow violations over a small subset of the state space. On the other hand, approaches based on Lipschitz continuity conditions can provide stronger guarantees, in particular deterministic ones in non-stochastic settings, yet they often suffer from expo-nential sample-complexity growth. Methods exploiting structural properties can alleviate some of the limita-tions of the previous two categories, for instance, by reducing data-collection burdens, and can, in certain cases, provide deterministic guarantees from remark-ably limited data; however, this comes at the cost of restricting the system class and often requiring stronger prior knowledge. A similar tension appears between abstraction-based and functional certificate methods. Abstraction-based approaches are highly expressive and naturally compatible with algorithmic synthesis for rich logical specifications, whereas functional certifi-cate methods avoid state-space discretization and can be more scalable, but are often conservative for rich temporal properties. Moreover, while compositional techniques are indispensable for large-scale intercon-nected systems, their current data-driven developments remain limited in scope and still leave major generality challenges unresolved. Overall, the present survey indicates that data-driven formal methods have matured into a promising and rapidly advancing research area, while a few fundamen-tal problems remain open. We hope that this survey helps make the area more accessible to researchers new to the area, clarifies the current state of the art, and contributes to shaping a coherent research agenda toward reliable, scalable, and practically deployable data-driven formal methods. 

References 

Abate, A., Giacobbe, M. & Roy, D. (2024), Stochastic omega-regular verification and control with supermartingales, in 

‘Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Aided Verification’, Springer, pp. 395–419. Agrawal, A. & Sreenath, K. (2017), Discrete control bar-rier functions for safety-critical control of discrete systems with application to bipedal robot navigation, in ‘Proceed-ings of Robotics: Science and Systems’, Vol. 13, Cam-bridge, MA, USA, pp. 1–10. Ahmadi, M., Israel, A. & Topcu, U. (2020), ‘Safe controller synthesis for data-driven differential inclusions’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 65 (11), 4934–4940. Ajeleye, D., Lavaei, A. & Zamani, M. (2023), ‘Data-driven controller synthesis via finite abstractions with formal guarantees’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 7, 3453–3458. Ajeleye, D. & Zamani, M. (2024), ‘Data-driven controller synthesis via co-B¨ uchi barrier certificates with formal guarantees’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 8, 958–963. Akbarzadeh, O., Ashoori, M. & Lavaei, A. (2025), Learning robust safety controllers for uncertain input-affine poly-nomial systems, in ‘Proceedings of the 64th IEEE Con-ference on Decision and Control’, pp. 5788–5793. Akbarzadeh, O., Ashoori, M., Nejati, A. & Lavaei, A. (2026), ‘A data-driven Krasovskii-based approach for safety con-troller design of time-delayed uncertain polynomial sys-tems’, arXiv:2601.20298 .Akbarzadeh, O., Nejati, A. & Lavaei, A. (2025), ‘From data to control: A formal compositional framework for large-scale interconnected networks’, arXiv:2409.12469v2 .Akbarzadeh, O., Samari, B., Nejati, A. & Lavaei, A. (2025), ‘From formal methods to data-driven safety certificates of unknown large-scale networks’, arXiv:2508.09520 .Akella, P. & Ames, A. D. (2022), ‘A barrier-based sce-nario approach to verifying safety-critical systems’, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7(4), 11062–11069. Akram, W. & Niazi, M. A. (2018), ‘A formal specification framework for smart grid components’, Complex Adaptive Systems Modeling 6(1), 1–16. Alanwar, A., Koch, A., Allg¨ ower, F. & Johansson, K. H. (2023), ‘Data-driven reachability analysis from noisy data’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 

68 (5), 3054–3069. Alavi, A., Nadali, A., Zamani, M. & Jafarpour, S. (2025), ‘Neural barrier certificates for monotone systems’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 9, 1496–1501. Alsalti, M., Lopez, V. G., Berberich, J., Allg¨ ower, F. & M¨ uller, M. A. (2023), ‘Data-based control of feedback lin-earizable systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Con-trol 68 (11), 7014–7021. Ames, A. D., Coogan, S., Egerstedt, M., Notomista, G., Sreenath, K. & Tabuada, P. (2019), Control barrier func-tions: Theory and applications, in ‘Proceedings of the 18th IEEE European Control Conference’, pp. 3420–3431. Ames, A. D., Xu, X., Grizzle, J. W. & Tabuada, P. (2016), ‘Control barrier function based quadratic programs for safety critical systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 62 (8), 3861–3876. Aminzadeh, A., Ashoori, M., Nejati, A. & Lavaei, A. (2026), ‘A physics-informed scenario approach with data mitigation for safety verification of nonlinear systems’, 

arXiv:2412.03932v2 .Aminzadeh, A., Swikir, A., Haddadin, S. & Lavaei, A. (2024), Compositional safety verification of infinite networks: A data-driven approach, in ‘Proceedings of IEEE European Control Conference’, pp. 545–551. Anand, M., Lavaei, A. & Zamani, M. (2024), ‘Compositional synthesis of control barrier certificates for networks of stochastic systems against ω-regular specifications’, Non-

43 linear Analysis: Hybrid Systems 51 .Anand, M., Murali, V., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2021), Safety verification of dynamical systems via k-inductive barrier certificates, in ‘Proceedings of the 60th IEEE Con-ference on Decision and Control’, pp. 1314–1320. Anand, M. & Zamani, M. (2023), ‘Formally verified neural network control barrier certificates for unknown systems’, 

IFAC-PapersOnLine 56 (2), 2431–2436. Angeli, D. & Sontag, E. (2003), ‘Monotone control systems’, 

IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 48 (10), 1684– 1698. Antoulas, A. C. (2005), Approximation of Large-Scale Dy-namical Systems , SIAM. Arcak, M., Meissen, C. & Packard, A. (2016), Networks of Dissipative Systems: Compositional Certification of Sta-bility, Performance, and Safety , Springer. Ashoori, M., Aminzadeh, A., Nejati, A. & Lavaei, A. (2025), ‘Physics-informed data-driven control of nonlinear poly-nomial systems with noisy data’, arXiv:2508.01315 .Astolfi, A. (2010), ‘Model reduction by moment matching for linear and nonlinear systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 55 (10), 2321–2336. Awan, A. U. & Zamani, M. (2023), ‘Formal synthesis of safety controllers for unknown systems using Gaussian process transfer learning’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 

7, 3741–3746. Awan, A. U. & Zamani, M. (2025), ‘Reduced-order Gaus-sian processes for partially unknown nonlinear con-trol systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 

70 (10), 6893–6900. Baier, C. & Katoen, J.-P. (2008), Principles of Model Check-ing , MIT Press. Bak, S. (2018), ‘ t-barrier certificates: A continuous analogy to k-induction’, IFAC-PapersOnLine 51 (16), 145–150. Balim, H., Aspeel, A., Liu, Z. & Ozay, N. (2023), ‘Koopman-inspired implicit backward reachable sets for unknown nonlinear systems’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 7, 2245– 2250. Banse, A., Romao, L., Abate, A. & Jungers, R. (2023 a), Data-driven memory-dependent abstractions of dynami-cal systems, in ‘Proceedings of the 5th Annual Learning for Dynamics & Control Conference’, Vol. 211 of Proceed-ings of Machine Learning Research , PMLR, pp. 891–902. Banse, A., Romao, L., Abate, A. & Jungers, R. M. (2023 b), Data-driven abstractions via adaptive refinements and a Kantorovich metric, in ‘Proceedings of the 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 6038–6043. Banse, A., Romao, L., Abate, A. & Jungers, R. M. (2025), ‘Data-driven memory-dependent abstractions of dynam-ical systems via a Cantor–Kantorovich metric’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 70 (12), 8092–8103. Belta, C., Yordanov, B. & Gol, E. A. (2017), Formal Methods for Discrete-Time Dynamical Systems , Vol. 89, Springer. Ben-David, S., Blitzer, J., Crammer, K., Kulesza, A., Pereira, F. & Vaughan, J. W. (2010), ‘A theory of learning from different domains’, Machine Learning 79 (1), 151– 175. Berberich, J., K¨ ohler, J., M¨ uller, M. A. & Allg¨ ower, F. (2020), ‘Data-driven model predictive control with sta-bility and robustness guarantees’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 66 (4), 1702–1717. Berger, G. O. & Jungers, R. M. (2025), ‘PAC learnability of scenario decision-making algorithms: Necessary con-ditions and sufficient conditions’, IEEE Control Systems Letters pp. 186–191. Besselink, B., van de Wouw, N., Scherpen, J. M. A. & Ni-jmeijer, H. (2014), ‘Model reduction for nonlinear systems by incremental balanced truncation’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 59 (10), 2739–2753. Bhattacharjee, D., Moreschini, A. & Astolfi, A. (2025), ‘Sig-nal generator agnostic moment matching’, IEEE Trans-actions on Automatic Control 70 (11), 7493–7508. Bianchi, M., Grammatico, S. & Cort´ es, J. (2025), ‘Data-driven stabilization of switched and constrained linear sys-tems’, Automatica 171 .Bisoffi, A., De Persis, C. & Tesi, P. (2022), ‘Data-driven control via Petersen’s lemma’, Automatica 145 .Bisoffi, A., De Persis, C. & Tesi, P. (2023), ‘Controller design for robust invariance from noisy data’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 68 (1), 636–643. Burohman, A. M., Besselink, B., Scherpen, J. M. A. & Cam-libel, M. K. (2023), ‘From data to reduced-order models via generalized balanced truncation’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 68 (10), 6160–6175. Calafiore, G. C. (2010), ‘Random convex programs’, SIAM Journal on Optimization 20 (6), 3427–3464. Calafiore, G. C. (2017), ‘Repetitive scenario design’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 62 (3), 1125–1137. Calafiore, G. C. & Campi, M. C. (2006), ‘The scenario ap-proach to robust control design’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 51 (5), 742–753. Calbert, J., Banse, A., Legat, B. & Jungers, R. M. (2024), Dionysos.jl: A modular platform for smart symbolic con-trol, in ‘Proceedings of the JuliaCon Conferences’, Vol. 6. Calbert, J., Girard, A. & Jungers, R. M. (2026), ‘Character-izing simulation relations through control architectures in abstraction-based control’, Automatica 190 .Campi, M. C. & Garatti, S. (2008), ‘The exact feasibility of randomized solutions of uncertain convex programs’, 

SIAM Journal on Optimization 19 (3), 1211–1230. Campi, M. C. & Garatti, S. (2011), ‘A sampling-and-discarding approach to chance-constrained optimization: Feasibility and optimality’, Journal of Optimization The-ory and Applications 148 (2), 257–280. Campi, M. C. & Garatti, S. (2018), ‘Wait-and-judge scenario optimization’, Mathematical Programming 167 (1), 155– 189. Campi, M. C. & Garatti, S. (2023), ‘Compression, general-ization and learning’, Journal of Machine Learning Re-search 24 (339), 1–74. Campi, M. C., Garatti, S. & Prandini, M. (2009), ‘The sce-nario approach for systems and control design’, Annual Reviews in Control 33 (2), 149–157. Campi, M. C. & Weyer, E. (2002), ‘Finite sample properties of system identification methods’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 47 (8), 1329–1334. Casablanca, E., Sch¨ on, O., Zuliani, P. & Soudjani, S. (2026), LUCID: Learning-enabled uncertainty-aware certification of stochastic dynamical systems, in ‘Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence’, Vol. 40, pp. 19916–19924. Cheng, R., Orosz, G., Murray, R. M. & Burdick, J. W. (2019), End-to-end safe reinforcement learning through barrier functions for safety-critical continuous control tasks, in 

‘Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intel-ligence’, Vol. 33, pp. 3387–3395. Chernoff, H. (1952), ‘A measure of asymptotic efficiency for tests of a hypothesis based on the sum of observations’, 

44 The Annals of Mathematical Statistics pp. 493–507. Chiuso, A. & Pillonetto, G. (2019), ‘System identification: A machine learning perspective’, Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems 2(1), 281–304. Clark, A. (2025), ‘A semialgebraic framework for verification and synthesis of control barrier functions’, IEEE Trans-actions on Automatic Control 70 (5), 3101–3116. Coogan, S., Arcak, M. & Belta, C. (2017), ‘Formal methods for control of traffic flow: Automated control synthesis from finite-state transition models’, IEEE Control Systems Magazine 37 (2), 109–128. Cook, B. (2009), ‘Principles of program termination’, Engi-neering Methods and Tools for Software Safety and Secu-rity 22 (161). Coppola, R., Peruffo, A., Lindemann, L. & Mazo, M. (2024), Scenario approach and conformal prediction for verifica-tion of unknown systems via data-driven abstractions, 

in ‘Proceedings of IEEE European Control Conference (ECC)’, pp. 558–563. Coppola, R., Peruffo, A. & Mazo Jr, M. (2023), ‘Data-driven abstractions for verification of deterministic sys-tems’, arXiv:2211.01793v2 .Coppola, R., Peruffo, A. & Mazo Jr, M. (2024), ‘Data-driven abstractions for control systems via random exploration’, 

arXiv:2402.10668v2 .Coppola, R., Peruffo, A. & Mazo, M. (2023), ‘Data-driven abstractions for verification of linear systems’, IEEE Con-trol Systems Letters 7, 2737–2742. Cosner, R. K., Sadalski, I., Woo, J. K., Culbertson, P. & Ames, A. D. (2024), Generative modeling of residuals for real-time risk-sensitive safety with discrete-time control barrier functions, in ‘Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation’. Dai, T. & Sznaier, M. (2021), ‘A semi-algebraic optimization approach to data-driven control of continuous-time non-linear systems’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 5(2), 487– 492. Dashkovskiy, S. N., R¨ uffer, B. S. & Wirth, F. R. (2010), ‘Small gain theorems for large scale systems and construc-tion of ISS Lyapunov functions’, SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization 48 (6), 4089–4118. Dawson, C., Gao, S. & Fan, C. (2023), ‘Safe control with learned certificates: A survey of neural Lyapunov, barrier, and contraction methods for robotics and control’, IEEE Transactions on Robotics 39 (3), 1749–1767. De Moura, L. & Bjørner, N. (2011), ‘Satisfiability modulo theories: Introduction and applications’, Communications of the ACM 54 (9), 69–77. De Moura, L., Rueß, H. & Sorea, M. (2003), Bounded model checking and induction: From refutation to verification, 

in ‘Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Aided Verification’, Springer, pp. 14–26. De Persis, C., Rotulo, M. & Tesi, P. (2023), ‘Learn-ing controllers from data via approximate nonlinearity cancellation’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 

68 (10), 6082–6097. De Persis, C. & Tesi, P. (2019), ‘Formulas for data-driven control: Stabilization, optimality, and robustness’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 65 (3), 909–924. De Persis, C. & Tesi, P. (2023), ‘Learning controllers for nonlinear systems from data’, Annual Reviews in Control 

56 .Devonport, A., Saoud, A. & Arcak, M. (2021), Symbolic ab-stractions from data: A PAC learning approach, in ‘Pro-ceedings of the 60th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 599–604. Dhiman, V., Khojasteh, M. J., Franceschetti, M. &Atanasov, N. (2023), ‘Control barriers in Bayesian learn-ing of system dynamics’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 68 (1), 214–229. Didier, A. & Zeilinger, M. N. (2026), ‘Approximate predictive control barrier function for discrete-time systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control .Donaldson, A. F., Haller, L., Kroening, D. & R¨ ummer, P. (2011), Software verification using k-induction, in ‘Pro-ceedings of International Static Analysis Symposium’, Springer, pp. 351–368. D¨ orfler, F., Coulson, J. & Markovsky, I. (2022), ‘Bridging direct and indirect data-driven control formulations via regularizations and relaxations’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 68 (2), 883–897. Dutertre, B. & Stavridou, V. (1997), ‘Formal requirements analysis of an avionics control system’, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 23 (5), 267–278. Eising, J., Liu, S., Mart´ ınez, S. & Cort´ es, J. (2025), ‘Data-driven mode detection and stabilization of unknown switched linear systems’, IEEE Transactions on Auto-matic Control 70 (6), 3830–3845. Esmaeili, B. & Modares, H. (2024), ‘Data-driven risk-averse safe control for nonlinear parameter-varying systems’, 

IEEE Control Systems Letters 8, 2649–2654. Esmaeili, B. & Modares, H. (2025), ‘SAFE–MA–RRT: Multi-agent motion planning with data-driven safety certifi-cates’, arXiv:2509.04413 .Fan, C., Mathur, U., Mitra, S. & Viswanathan, M. (2018), Controller synthesis made real: Reach-avoid specifications and linear dynamics, in ‘Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Aided Verification’, Springer, pp. 347–366. Fazlyab, M., Robey, A., Hassani, H., Morari, M. & Pappas, G. (2019), Efficient and accurate estimation of Lipschitz constants for deep neural networks, in ‘Proceedings of Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems’, Vol. 32. Fisac, J. F., Akametalu, A. K., Zeilinger, M. N., Kay-nama, S., Gillula, J. & Tomlin, C. J. (2019), ‘A general safety framework for learning-based control in uncertain robotic systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Con-trol 64 (7), 2737–2752. Gadginmath, D., Krishnan, V. & Pasqualetti, F. (2024), ‘Data-driven feedback linearization using the Koopman generator’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 

69 (12), 8844–8851. Galarza-Jimenez, F., Zamani, M. & Jafarpour, S. (2025), Trajectory-based barrier certificates for monotone sys-tems, in ‘Proceedings of the 64th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 5831–5836. Gardner, J., Wooding, B., Nejati, A. & Lavaei, A. (2025), TRUST: StabiliTy and safety contRoller synthesis for Un-known dynamical models using a Single Trajectory, in 

‘Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control’, pp. 1–16. Ghiasi, N. & Kiumarsi, B. (2025), A data-driven approach to safe control of linear systems, in ‘Proceedings of the 64th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 3888– 3894. Girard, A. & Pappas, G. J. (2007), ‘Approximation metrics for discrete and continuous systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 52 (5), 782–798. 

45 Girard, A. & Pappas, G. J. (2009), ‘Hierarchical control system design using approximate simulation’, Automatica 

45 (2), 566–571. Givan, R., Leach, S. & Dean, T. (2000), ‘Bounded-parameter Markov decision processes’, Artificial Intelligence 122 (1-2), 71–109. Haesaert, S., Van den Hof, P. M. & Abate, A. (2017), ‘Data-driven and model-based verification via Bayesian identifi-cation and reachability analysis’, Automatica 79 , 115–126. Han, S., Topcu, U. & Pappas, G. J. (2015), A sublinear algorithm for barrier-certificate-based data-driven model validation of dynamical systems, in ‘Proceedings of the 54th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 2049– 2054. Haseli, M. & Cort´ es, J. (2022), ‘Learning Koopman eigen-functions and invariant subspaces from data: Symmet-ric subspace decomposition’, IEEE Transactions on Au-tomatic Control 67 (7), 3442–3457. Hashimoto, K., Saoud, A., Kishida, M., Ushio, T. & Di-marogonas, D. V. (2022), ‘Learning-based symbolic ab-stractions for nonlinear control systems’, Automatica 146 .Hern´ andez, M. (2001), ‘Chebyshev’s approximation algo-rithms and applications’, Computers & Mathematics with Applications 41 (3-4), 433–445. Hjalmarsson, H. (2005), ‘From experiment design to closed-loop control’, Automatica 41 (3), 393–438. Hornik, K., Stinchcombe, M. & White, H. (1989), ‘Multi-layer feedforward networks are universal approximators’, 

Neural Networks 2(5), 359–366. Hou, Z.-S. & Wang, Z. (2013), ‘From model-based control to data-driven control: Survey, classification and perspec-tive’, Information Sciences 235 , 3–35. Hu, S., Lopata, V., Soudjani, S. & Zuliani, P. (2025), Ver-ification of quantum circuits through barrier certificates using a scenario approach, in ‘Proceedings of IEEE Inter-national Conference on Quantum Software’, pp. 151–161. Iraji, R., Galarza-Jimenez, F. & Zamani, M. (2025), Data-driven verification of dynamical systems via closure cer-tificates, in ‘Proceedings of the 64th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 1350–1355. Jackson, J., Laurenti, L., Frew, E. & Lahijanian, M. (2020), Safety verification of unknown dynamical systems via Gaussian process regression, in ‘Proceedings of the 59th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 860–866. Jackson, J., Laurenti, L., Frew, E. & Lahijanian, M. (2021), Strategy synthesis for partially-known switched stochastic systems, in ‘Proceedings of the 24th International Con-ference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control’, pp. 1–11. Jagtap, P., Pappas, G. J. & Zamani, M. (2020), Control bar-rier functions for unknown nonlinear systems using Gaus-sian processes, in ‘Proceedings of the 59th IEEE Confer-ence on Decision and Control’, pp. 3699–3704. Jahanshahi, N. & Zamani, M. (2023 a), Data-driven synthe-sis of safety controllers for partially-observable systems with unknown models, in ‘Proceedings of the 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 1052–1057. Jahanshahi, N. & Zamani, M. (2023 b), ‘Synthesis of con-trollers for partially-observable systems: A data-driven ap-proach’, IFAC-PapersOnLine 56 (2), 5525–5530. Jin, W., Wang, Z., Yang, Z. & Mou, S. (2020), ‘Neural cer-tificates for safe control policies’, arXiv:2006.08465 .Kashani, A., Strong, A. K., Bridgeman, L. J. & Danielson, C. (2026), ‘Data-driven certified control barrier functions’, 

Systems & Control Letters 208 .Kawano, Y., Besselink, B., Scherpen, J. M. A. & Cao, M. (2020), ‘Data-driven model reduction of monotone sys-tems by nonlinear DC gains’, IEEE Transactions on Au-tomatic Control 65 (5), 2094–2106. Kazemi, M., Majumdar, R., Salamati, M., Soudjani, S. & Wooding, B. (2024), ‘Data-driven abstraction-based con-trol synthesis’, Nonlinear Analysis: Hybrid Systems 52 .Kerschen, G., Worden, K., Vakakis, A. F. & Golinval, J.-C. (2006), ‘Past, present and future of nonlinear system identification in structural dynamics’, Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing 20 (3), 505–592. Kim, E. S., Arcak, M. & Seshia, S. A. (2016), Directed speci-fications and assumption mining for monotone dynamical systems, in ‘Proceedings of the 19th International Con-ference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control’, pp. 21–30. Klebanov, I., Schuster, I. & Sullivan, T. J. (2020), ‘A rigorous theory of conditional mean embeddings’, SIAM Journal on Mathematics of Data Science 2(3), 583–606. Klipp, E., Herwig, R., Kowald, A., Wierling, C. & Lehrach, H. (2005), Systems Biology in Practice: Concepts, Imple-mentation and Application , John Wiley & Sons. Kocijan, J. (2016), Modelling and Control of Dynamic Sys-tems Using Gaussian Process Models , Springer. Kress-Gazit, H., Lahijanian, M. & Raman, V. (2018), ‘Syn-thesis for robots: Guarantees and feedback for robot be-havior’, Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Au-tonomous Systems 1(1), 211–236. Laurenti, L. & Lahijanian, M. (2026), ‘A unifying perspective for safety of stochastic systems: From barrier functions to finite abstractions’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 71 (2), 769–779. Lavaei, A. (2023 a), MDP abstractions from data: Large-scale stochastic networks, in ‘Proceedings of the 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 6058–6063. Lavaei, A. (2023 b), Symbolic abstractions with guarantees: A data-driven divide-and-conquer strategy, in ‘Proceedings of the 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 7994–7999. Lavaei, A. (2025), ‘Data-driven stochastic control via non-i.i.d. trajectories: Foundations and guarantees’, 

arXiv:2507.23280 .Lavaei, A. & Angeli, D. (2023), ‘Data-driven stability cer-tificate of interconnected homogeneous networks via ISS properties’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 7, 2395–2400. Lavaei, A. & Angeli, D. (2026), ‘From dissipativity property to data-driven GAS certificate of degree-one homogeneous networks with unknown topology’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control .Lavaei, A., Di Lillo, L., Censi, A. & Frazzoli, E. (2022), ‘For-mal estimation of collision risks for autonomous vehicles: A compositional data-driven approach’, IEEE Transac-tions on Control of Network Systems 10 (1), 407–418. Lavaei, A. & Frazzoli, E. (2022), ‘Data-driven synthesis of symbolic abstractions with guaranteed confidence’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 7, 253–258. Lavaei, A., Khaled, M., Soudjani, S. & Zamani, M. (2020), AMYTISS: Parallelized automated controller synthesis for large-scale stochastic systems, in ‘Proceedings of In-ternational Conference on Computer Aided Verification’, Springer, pp. 461–474. Lavaei, A., Perez, M., Kazemi, M., Somenzi, F., Soudjani, S., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2023), ‘Compositional re-

46 inforcement learning for discrete-time stochastic control systems’, IEEE Open Journal of Control Systems 2, 425– 438. Lavaei, A., Somenzi, F., Soudjani, S., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2020), Formal controller synthesis for continuous-space MDPs via model-free reinforcement learning, in 

‘Proceedings of ACM/IEEE 11th International Confer-ence on Cyber-Physical Systems’, pp. 98–107. Lavaei, A., Soudjani, S., Abate, A. & Zamani, M. (2022), ‘Automated verification and synthesis of stochastic hybrid systems: A survey’, Automatica 146 .Lavaei, A., Soudjani, S. E. Z., Majumdar, R. & Zamani, M. (2017), Compositional abstractions of interconnected discrete-time stochastic control systems, in ‘Proceedings of the 56th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 3551–3556. Lavaei, A., Soudjani, S. & Frazzoli, E. (2023), ‘A composi-tional dissipativity approach for data-driven safety verifi-cation of large-scale dynamical systems’, IEEE Transac-tions on Automatic Control 68 (12), 7240–7253. Lavaei, A., Soudjani, S., Frazzoli, E. & Zamani, M. (2023), ‘Constructing MDP abstractions using data with formal guarantees’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 7, 460–465. Lederer, A., Begzadi´ c, A., Hirche, S., Cort´ es, J. & Herbert, S. (2025), ‘Safe event-triggered Gaussian process learning for barrier-constrained control’, arXiv:2408.16144v3 .Lederer, A., Umlauft, J. & Hirche, S. (2019), ‘Uniform error bounds for Gaussian process regression with application to safe control’, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 , 659–669. Leenheer, P. D., Angeli, D. & Sontag, E. D. (2007), ‘Mono-tone chemical reaction networks’, Journal of Mathemati-cal Chemistry 41 (3), 295–314. Leveson, N. G. (2016), Engineering a Safer World: Systems Thinking Applied to Safety , The MIT Press. Lewis, M., Soudjani, S. & Zuliani, P. (2024), ‘Verification of quantum circuits through discrete-time barrier certifi-cates’, arXiv:2408.07591 .Li, L., Bisoffi, A., De Persis, C. & Monshizadeh, N. (2026), ‘Controller synthesis from noisy-input noisy-output data’, 

Automatica 183 .Lindemann, L., Hu, H., Robey, A., Zhang, H., Dimarogonas, D., Tu, S. & Matni, N. (2021), Learning hybrid control barrier functions from data, in ‘Proceedings of Conference on Robot Learning’, PMLR, pp. 1351–1370. Lindemann, L., Robey, A., Jiang, L., Das, S., Tu, S. & Matni, N. (2024), ‘Learning robust output control barrier func-tions from safe expert demonstrations’, IEEE Open Jour-nal of Control Systems 3, 158–172. Lindemann, L., Zhao, Y., Yu, X., Pappas, G. J. & Desh-mukh, J. V. (2025), ‘Formal verification and control with conformal prediction: Practical safety guarantees for au-tonomous systems’, IEEE Control Systems 45 (6), 72–122. Lopez, D. M., Althoff, M., Benet, L., Coogan, S., Forets, M., Harapanahalli, A., Johnson, T. T., Ladner, T., Schilling, C., Zhang, H. & Zhong, X. (2025), ARCH-COMP25 cate-gory report: Artificial intelligence and neural network con-trol systems (AINNCS) for continuous and hybrid systems plants, in ‘Proceedings of the 12th International Work-shop on Applied Verification for Continuous and Hybrid Systems’, Vol. 108 of EPiC Series in Computing , pp. 71– 121. Luo, W., Sun, W. & Kapoor, A. (2020), ‘Multi-robot colli-sion avoidance under uncertainty with probabilistic safety barrier certificates’, Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems 33 , 372–383. Luppi, A., Bisoffi, A., De Persis, C. & Tesi, P. (2024), ‘Data-driven design of safe control for polynomial systems’, Eu-ropean Journal of Control 75 .Makdesi, A., Girard, A. & Fribourg, L. (2021 a), Data-driven abstraction of monotone systems, in ‘Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Learning for Dynamics & Control’, Vol. 144 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , PMLR, pp. 803–814. Makdesi, A., Girard, A. & Fribourg, L. (2021 b), ‘Efficient data-driven abstraction of monotone systems with distur-bances’, IFAC-PapersOnLine 54 (5), 49–54. Makdesi, A., Girard, A. & Fribourg, L. (2023), ‘Data-driven models of monotone systems’, IEEE Transactions on Au-tomatic Control 69 (8), 5294–5309. Mao, J. & Scarciotti, G. (2024), ‘Data-driven model reduc-tion by two-sided moment matching’, Automatica 166 .Margellos, K., Goulart, P. & Lygeros, J. (2014), ‘On the road between robust optimization and the scenario approach for chance constrained optimization problems’, IEEE Trans-actions on Automatic Control 59 (8), 2258–2263. Markovsky, I. & D¨ orfler, F. (2021), ‘Behavioral systems the-ory in data-driven analysis, signal processing, and con-trol’, Annual Reviews in Control 52 , 42–64. Martin, T., Sch¨ on, T. B. & Allg¨ ower, F. (2023), ‘Guarantees for data-driven control of nonlinear systems using semidef-inite programming: A survey’, Annual Reviews in Control 

56 .Mathiesen, F. B., Lahijanian, M. & Laurenti, L. (2024), ‘IntervalMDP.jl: Accelerated value iteration for inter-val Markov decision processes’, IFAC-PapersOnLine 

58 (11), 1–6. Mazo Jr, M., Davitian, A. & Tabuada, P. (2010), Pessoa: A tool for embedded controller synthesis, in ‘Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Aided Verifica-tion’, Springer, pp. 566–569. Mazouz, R., Muvvala, K., Ratheesh Babu, A., Laurenti, L. & Lahijanian, M. (2022), ‘Safety guarantees for neu-ral network dynamic systems via stochastic barrier func-tions’, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 

35 , 9672–9686. Mazouz, R., Skovbekk, J., Mathiesen, F. B., Frew, E., Lau-renti, L. & Lahijanian, M. (2024), Data-driven permissi-ble safe control with barrier certificates, in ‘Proceedings of the 63rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 6844–6849. McGregor, J. D., Gluch, D. P. & Feiler, P. H. (2017), ‘Anal-ysis and design of safety-critical, cyber-physical systems’, 

Ada Letters 36 (2), 31–38. Mironchenko, A. (2023), Input-to-State Stability: Theory and Applications , Springer Nature. Modares, A., Ghiasi, N., Kiumarsi, B. & Modares, H. (2026), ‘Unifying direct and indirect learning for safe control of linear systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 

.Modares, A., Lian, B. & Modares, H. (2025), ‘Non-conservative data-driven safe control design for nonlinear systems with polyhedral safe sets’, arXiv:2505.07733 .Modares, H. (2024), ‘Data-driven safe control of uncertain linear systems under aleatory uncertainty’, IEEE Trans-actions on Automatic Control 69 (1), 551–558. Mohajerin Esfahani, P., Sutter, T. & Lygeros, J. (2015), ‘Performance bounds for the scenario approach and an ex-

47 tension to a class of non-convex programs’, IEEE Trans-actions on Automatic Control 60 (1), 46–58. Monshizadeh, N., De Persis, C. & Tesi, P. (2026), ‘A versatile framework for data-driven control of nonlinear systems’, 

IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 71 (1), 528–535. Moreschini, A., Scandella, M., Astolfi, A. & Parisini, T. (2026), ‘Moment matching by kernel-based learning’, 

IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 71 (4), 2123– 2138. Mouelhi, S., Girard, A. & G¨ ossler, G. (2013), CoSyMA: A tool for controller synthesis using multi-scale abstractions, 

in ‘Proceedings of the 16th ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control’, pp. 83–88. Murali, V., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2022), ‘A scenario approach for synthesizing k-inductive barrier certificates’, 

IEEE Control Systems Letters 6, 3247–3252. Murali, V., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2024), Closure cer-tificates, in ‘Proceedings of the 27th ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Con-trol’, pp. 1–11. Myung, I. J. (2003), ‘Tutorial on maximum likelihood esti-mation’, Journal of Mathematical Psychology 47 (1), 90– 100. Nadali, A., Murali, V., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2024), Neural closure certificates, in ‘Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence’, Vol. 38, pp. 21446– 21453. Nadali, A., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2023), Transfer learn-ing for barrier certificates, in ‘Proceedings of the 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 8000– 8005. Nadali, A., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2024), ‘Transfer of safety controllers through learning deep inverse dynamics model’, IFAC-PapersOnLine 58 (11), 129–134. Nadali, A., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2025 a), On choice of loss functions for neural control barrier certificates, in 

‘Proceedings of International Conference on Quantitative Evaluation of Systems and Formal Modeling and Analysis of Timed Systems’, Springer, pp. 468–486. Nadali, A., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2025 b), Stochas-tic neural simulation relations for control transfer, in 

‘Proceedings of the International Conference on Neuro-Symbolic Systems’, Vol. 288, PMLR, pp. 597–620. Nadali, A., Zhong, B., Trivedi, A. & Zamani, M. (2024), ‘Transfer learning for control systems via neural simula-tion relations’, arXiv:2412.01783 .Nakano, T., Aboudonia, A., Eising, J., Martinelli, A., D¨ orfler, F. & Lygeros, J. (2025), ‘Dissipativity-based data-driven decentralized control of interconnected systems’, 

arXiv:2509.14047 .Nazeri, M., Badings, T., Schmuck, A.-K., Soudjani, S. & Abate, A. (2025), Data-driven abstraction and synthesis for stochastic systems with unknown dynamics, in ‘Pro-ceedings of the 64th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 6754–6759. Nazeri, M., Badings, T., Soudjani, S. & Abate, A. (2025), Data-driven yet formal policy synthesis for stochastic non-linear dynamical systems, in ‘Proceedings of the 7th An-nual Learning for Dynamics & Control Conference’, Vol. 283 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , PMLR, pp. 1550–1564. Nejati, A., Lavaei, A., Jagtap, P., Soudjani, S. & Zamani, M. (2023), ‘Formal verification of unknown discrete- and continuous-time systems: A data-driven approach’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 68 (5), 3011–3024. Nejati, A., Lavaei, A., Soudjani, S. & Zamani, M. (2023), ‘Es-timation of infinitesimal generators for unknown stochas-tic hybrid systems via sampling: A formal approach’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 7, 223–228. Nejati, A. & Zamani, M. (2023), ‘Data-driven synthesis of safety controllers via multiple control barrier certificates’, 

IEEE Control Systems Letters 7, 2497–2502. Nejati, A., Zhong, B., Caccamo, M. & Zamani, M. (2022), Data-driven controller synthesis of unknown nonlinear polynomial systems via control barrier certificates, in ‘Pro-ceedings of the 4th Annual Learning for Dynamics & Con-trol Conference’, Vol. 168 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-ing Research , PMLR, pp. 763–776. Niknejad, N. & Modares, H. (2024), ‘Physics-informed data-driven safe and optimal control design’, IEEE Control Sys-tems Letters 8, 285–290. Noroozi, N., Salamati, A. & Zamani, M. (2021), ‘Data-driven safety verification of discrete-time networks: A composi-tional approach’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 6, 2210– 2215. Oumer, M. A., Alanwar, A. & Zamani, M. (2025), Data-driven safety verification using barrier certificates and ma-trix zonotopes, in ‘Proceedings of the 64th IEEE Confer-ence on Decision and Control’, pp. 3913–3918. Oymak, S. & Ozay, N. (2019), Non-asymptotic identification of LTI systems from a single trajectory, in ‘Proceedings of IEEE American Control Conference’, pp. 5655–5661. Paccagnan, D., Campi, M. & Garatti, S. (2023), ‘The pick-to-learn algorithm: Empowering compression for tight generalization bounds and improved post-training perfor-mance’, Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems 36 , 18165–18185. Padoan, A., Scarciotti, G. & Astolfi, A. (2017), ‘A geometric characterization of the persistence of excitation condition for the solutions of autonomous systems’, IEEE Transac-tions on Automatic Control 62 (11), 5666–5677. Pappas, G., Lafferriere, G. & Sastry, S. (2000), ‘Hierarchi-cally consistent control systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 45 (6), 1144–1160. Peruffo, A. & Mazo, M. (2022), ‘Data-driven abstractions with probabilistic guarantees for linear PETC systems’, 

IEEE Control Systems Letters 7, 115–120. Peruffo, A. & Mazo, M. (2025), ‘Sampling performance of periodic event-triggered control systems: A data-driven approach’, IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Sys-tems 12 (1), 800–811. Pillonetto, G., Dinuzzo, F., Chen, T., De Nicolao, G. & Ljung, L. (2014), ‘Kernel methods in system identifica-tion, machine learning and function estimation: A survey’, 

Automatica 50 (3), 657–682. Pnueli, A. (1977), The temporal logic of programs, in ‘Pro-ceedings of the 18th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science’, IEEE, pp. 46–57. Podelski, A. & Rybalchenko, A. (2004), Transition invari-ants, in ‘Proceedings of the 19th Annual IEEE Sympo-sium on Logic in Computer Science’, pp. 32–41. Pola, G. & Di Benedetto, M. D. (2019), ‘Control of cyber-physical-systems with logic specifications: A formal meth-ods approach’, Annual Reviews in Control 47 , 178–192. Pola, G., Pepe, P. & Di Benedetto, M. D. (2016), ‘Symbolic models for networks of control systems’, IEEE Transac-tions on Automatic Control 61 (11), 3663–3668. Prajna, S. (2006), ‘Barrier certificates for nonlinear model 

48 validation’, Automatica 42 (1), 117–126. Prajna, S. & Jadbabaie, A. (2004), Safety verification of hy-brid systems using barrier certificates, in ‘Proceedings of International Workshop on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control’, Springer, pp. 477–492. Prajna, S., Jadbabaie, A. & Pappas, G. J. (2007), ‘A frame-work for worst-case and stochastic safety verification us-ing barrier certificates’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 52 (8), 1415–1428. Puterman, M. L. (2014), Markov Decision Processes: Dis-crete Stochastic Dynamic Programming , John Wiley & Sons. Qin, Z., Sun, D. & Fan, C. (2022), ‘SABLAS: Learning safe control for black-box dynamical systems’, IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7(2), 1928–1935. Rasmussen, C. E. (2003), Gaussian processes in machine learning, in ‘Summer School on Machine Learning’, Springer, pp. 63–71. Recht, B. (2019), ‘A tour of reinforcement learning: The view from continuous control’, Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems 2(1), 253–279. Reed, R. & Lahijanian, M. (2025), Learning-based shielding for safe autonomy under unknown dynamics, in ‘Proceed-ings of IEEE American Control Conference’, pp. 4940– 4946. Reed, R., Laurenti, L. & Lahijanian, M. (2023), ‘Promises of deep kernel learning for control synthesis’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 7, 3986–3991. Reed, R., Laurenti, L. & Lahijanian, M. (2025), Error bounds for Gaussian process regression under bounded support noise with applications to safety certification, in ‘Proceed-ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence’, Vol. 39, pp. 20157–20164. Reissig, G., Weber, A. & Rungger, M. (2016), ‘Feed-back refinement relations for the synthesis of symbolic controllers’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 

62 (4), 1781–1796. Rickard, L., Abate, A. & Margellos, K. (2025), Continuous-time data-driven barrier certificate synthesis, in ‘Proceed-ings of the 64th IEEE Conference on Decision and Con-trol’, pp. 5794–5799. Rickard, L., Abate, A. & Margellos, K. (2026), ‘Data-driven certificate synthesis’, Automatica 185 .Romao, L., Papachristodoulou, A. & Margellos, K. (2022), ‘On the exact feasibility of convex scenario programs with discarded constraints’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 68 (4), 1986–2001. Rotulo, M., De Persis, C. & Tesi, P. (2022), ‘Online learn-ing of data-driven controllers for unknown switched linear systems’, Automatica 145 .Roy, P., Tabuada, P. & Majumdar, R. (2011), Pessoa 2.0: A controller synthesis tool for cyber-physical systems, in 

‘Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control’, pp. 315– 316. Rueda-Escobedo, J. G., Fridman, E. & Schiffer, J. (2022), ‘Data-driven control for linear discrete-time de-lay systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 

67 (7), 3321–3336. Sadraddini, S. & Belta, C. (2018), Formal guarantees in data-driven model identification and control synthesis, in ‘Pro-ceedings of the 21st International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control’, pp. 147–156. Sadraddini, S. & Belta, C. (2019), ‘Formal synthesis of control strategies for positive monotone systems’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 64 (2), 480–495. Sa˘ glam, I., Nazeri, M., Abate, A., Soudjani, S. & Schmuck, A.-K. (2026), Incremental data-driven policy synthesis via game abstractions, in ‘Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-ence on Artificial Intelligence’, Vol. 40, pp. 36360–36368. Salamati, A., Lavaei, A., Soudjani, S. & Zamani, M. (2021), ‘Data-driven safety verification of stochastic systems via barrier certificates’, IFAC-PapersOnLine 54 (5), 7–12. Salamati, A., Lavaei, A., Soudjani, S. & Zamani, M. (2024), ‘Data-driven verification and synthesis of stochastic sys-tems via barrier certificates’, Automatica 159 .Salamati, A. & Zamani, M. (2022 a), Data-driven safety ver-ification of stochastic systems via barrier certificates: A wait-and-judge approach, in ‘Proceedings of the 4th An-nual Learning for Dynamics & Control Conference’, Vol. 168 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , PMLR, pp. 441–452. Salamati, A. & Zamani, M. (2022 b), ‘Safety verification of stochastic systems: A repetitive scenario approach’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 7, 448–453. Samari, B., Akbarzadeh, O., Zaker, M. & Lavaei, A. (2024), ‘From a single trajectory to safety controller synthesis of discrete-time nonlinear polynomial systems’, IEEE Con-trol Systems Letters 8, 3123–3128. Samari, B., Incremona, G. P., Ferrara, A. & Lavaei, A. (2025), ‘From data to sliding mode control of un-certain large-scale networks with unknown dynamics’, 

arXiv:2502.19806 .Samari, B. & Lavaei, A. (2025), Data-driven dynamic con-troller synthesis for discrete-time general nonlinear sys-tems, in ‘Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Con-ference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control’, pp. 1–12. Samari, B., Nejati, A. & Lavaei, A. (2025), Model order reduction from data with certification, in ‘Proceedings of the 64th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 5800–5805. Samari, B., Nejati, A. & Lavaei, A. (2026), ‘Data-driven control of large-scale networks with formal guarantees: A small-gain-free approach’, IEEE Transactions on Auto-matic Control .Samari, B., Sandberg, H., Johansson, K. H. & Lavaei, A. (2026 a), ‘Data-driven model order reduction of nonlinear systems with noisy data’, arXiv:2507.18131v2 .Samari, B., Sandberg, H., Johansson, K. H. & Lavaei, A. (2026 b), ‘From noisy data to hierarchical control: A model-order-reduction framework’, arXiv:2603.25057 .Samari, B., Zaker, M. & Lavaei, A. (2025), Abstraction-based control of unknown continuous-space models with just two trajectories, in ‘Proceedings of the 7th Annual Learning for Dynamics & Control Conference’, Vol. 283 of Pro-ceedings of Machine Learning Research , PMLR, pp. 1167– 1179. Santoyo, C., Dutreix, M. & Coogan, S. (2021), ‘A barrier function approach to finite-time stochastic system verifi-cation and control’, Automatica 125 .Saoud, A. & Arcak, M. (2024), ‘Characterization, verifica-tion and computation of robust controlled invariants for monotone dynamical systems’, Mathematics of Control, Signals, and Systems 36 (1), 71–100. Scarciotti, G. & Astolfi, A. (2017), ‘Data-driven model re-duction by moment matching for linear and nonlinear sys-tems’, Automatica 79 , 340–351. 

49 Sch¨ on, O., Naseer, S., Wooding, B. & Soudjani, S. (2024), ‘Data-driven abstractions via binary-tree Gaussian pro-cesses for formal verification’, IFAC-PapersOnLine 

58 (11), 115–122. Sch¨ on, O., van Huijgevoort, B., Haesaert, S. & Soudjani, S. (2025), ‘Bayesian formal synthesis of unknown systems via robust simulation relations’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 70 (3), 1531–1546. Sch¨ on, O., Zhong, Z. & Soudjani, S. (2026), ‘Kernel-based learning of safety barriers’, arXiv:2601.12002 .Schwarting, W., Alonso-Mora, J. & Rus, D. (2018), ‘Plan-ning and decision-making for autonomous vehicles’, An-nual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Sys-tems 1(1), 187–210. Sch¨ on, O., Zhong, Z. & Soudjani, S. (2024), Data-driven dis-tributionally robust safety verification using barrier cer-tificates and conditional mean embeddings, in ‘Proceed-ings of IEEE American Control Conference’, pp. 3417– 3423. Shafer, G. & Vovk, V. (2008), ‘A tutorial on conformal pre-diction’, Journal of Machine Learning Research 9(3). Shakouri, A., van Waarde, H. J. & Kanat Camlibel, M. (2025), ‘A new perspective on Willems’ fundamental lemma: Universality of persistently exciting inputs’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 9, 583–588. Sheeran, M., Singh, S. & St˚ almarck, G. (2000), Checking safety properties using induction and a SAT-solver, in 

‘Proceedings of International Conference on Formal Meth-ods in Computer-Aided Design’, Springer, pp. 127–144. Skovbekk, J., Laurenti, L., Frew, E. & Lahijanian, M. (2025), ‘Formal verification of unknown dynamical systems via Gaussian process regression’, IEEE Transactions on Au-tomatic Control 70 (8), 4960–4975. Smith, S. W., Arcak, M. & Zamani, M. (2020), ‘Approxi-mate abstractions of control systems with an application to aggregation’, Automatica 119 .Summers, S. & Lygeros, J. (2010), ‘Verification of discrete time stochastic hybrid systems: A stochastic reach-avoid decision problem’, Automatica 46 (12), 1951–1961. Sun, Z. & Hebbale, K. (2005), Challenges and opportuni-ties in automotive transmission control, in ‘Proceedings of IEEE American Control Conference’, pp. 3284–3289. Swikir, A. & Zamani, M. (2019), ‘Compositional synthesis of finite abstractions for networks of systems: A small-gain approach’, Automatica 107 , 551–561. Sznaier, M., Allgower, F., de Oliveira, A. C. B., Ozay, N. & Sontag, E. (2025), Tutorial: Data driven and learning enabled control, in ‘Proceedings of the 64th IEEE Con-ference on Decision and Control’, pp. 2858–2873. Tabuada, P. (2009), Verification and Control of Hybrid Sys-tems: A Symbolic Approach , Springer Science & Business Media. Tabuada, P. & Pappas, G. J. (2005), ‘Hierarchical trajectory refinement for a class of nonlinear systems’, Automatica 

41 (4), 701–708. Taheri, S. & Zamani, M. (2025), Neural barrier certificates for stochastic control systems, in ‘Proceedings of the 64th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 7695– 7700. Valiant, L. G. (1984), ‘A theory of the learnable’, Commu-nications of the ACM 27 (11), 1134–1142. van Huijgevoort, B., Engelaar, M., Soudjani, S. & Haesaert, S. (2025), ‘SySCoRe 2.0: Toolset for formal control syn-thesis of continuous-state stochastic systems and temporal logic specifications’, Nonlinear Analysis: Hybrid Systems 

58 .van Waarde, H. J., Camlibel, M. K., Eising, J. & Trentelman, H. L. (2023), ‘Quadratic matrix inequalities with appli-cations to data-based control’, SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization 61 (4), 2251–2281. van Waarde, H. J., Camlibel, M. K. & Mesbahi, M. (2020), ‘From noisy data to feedback controllers: Nonconservative design via a matrix S-lemma’, IEEE Transactions on Au-tomatic Control 67 (1), 162–175. van Waarde, H. J., De Persis, C., Camlibel, M. K. & Tesi, P. (2020), ‘Willems’ fundamental lemma for state-space sys-tems and its extension to multiple datasets’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 4(3), 602–607. van Waarde, H. J., Eising, J., Trentelman, H. L. & Camlibel, M. K. (2020), ‘Data informativity: A new perspective on data-driven analysis and control’, IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control 65 (11), 4753–4768. Verhaegen, M. & Verdult, V. (2007), Filtering and System Identification: A Least Squares Approach , Cambridge Uni-versity Press. Wabersich, K. P., Taylor, A. J., Choi, J. J., Sreenath, K., Tomlin, C. J., Ames, A. D. & Zeilinger, M. N. (2023), ‘Data-driven safety filters: Hamilton-Jacobi reach-ability, control barrier functions, and predictive methods for uncertain systems’, IEEE Control Systems Magazine 

43 (5), 137–177. Wabersich, K. P. & Zeilinger, M. N. (2021), ‘A predictive safety filter for learning-based control of constrained non-linear dynamical systems’, Automatica 129 .Wajid, R., Awan, A. U. & Zamani, M. (2022), Formal syn-thesis of safety controllers for unknown stochastic control systems using Gaussian process learning, in ‘Proceedings of the 4th Annual Learning for Dynamics & Control Con-ference’, Vol. 168 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-search , PMLR, pp. 624–636. Wang, C., Meng, Y., Smith, S. L. & Liu, J. (2022), Data-driven learning of safety-critical control with stochastic control barrier functions, in ‘Proceedings of the 61st IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 5309–5315. Wang, L., Ames, A. D. & Egerstedt, M. (2017), ‘Safety barrier certificates for collisions-free multirobot systems’, 

IEEE Transactions on Robotics 33 (3), 661–674. Wang, L., Theodorou, E. A. & Egerstedt, M. (2018), Safe learning of quadrotor dynamics using barrier certificates, 

in ‘Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation’, pp. 2460–2465. Wang, Y., Zhan, S. S., Jiao, R., Wang, Z., Jin, W., Yang, Z., Wang, Z., Huang, C. & Zhu, Q. (2023), Enforcing hard constraints with soft barriers: Safe reinforcement learning in unknown stochastic environments, in ‘Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning’, PMLR, pp. 36593–36604. Wang, Z. & Jungers, R. M. (2020), ‘A data-driven immer-sion technique for linearization of discrete-time nonlinear systems’, IFAC-PapersOnLine 53 (2), 869–874. Wang, Z. & Jungers, R. M. (2021), ‘A data-driven method for computing polyhedral invariant sets of black-box switched linear systems’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 5(5), 1843– 1848. Wang, Z., Jungers, R. M. & Ong, C. J. (2023), ‘Computation of invariant sets via immersion for discrete-time nonlinear systems’, Automatica 147 .Wieland, P. & Allg¨ ower, F. (2007), ‘Constructive safety us-

50 ing control barrier functions’, IFAC Proceedings Volumes 

40 (12), 462–467. Willems, J. C., Rapisarda, P., Markovsky, I. & De Moor, B. L. (2005), ‘A note on persistency of excitation’, Systems & Control Letters 54 (4), 325–329. Wooding, B. & Lavaei, A. (2024 a), IMPaCT: Interval MDP Parallel construction for Controller synthesis of large-scale sTochastic systems, in ‘Proceedings of International Con-ference on Quantitative Evaluation of Systems and For-mal Modeling and Analysis of Timed Systems’, Springer, pp. 249–267. Wooding, B. & Lavaei, A. (2024 b), ‘Learning k-inductive control barrier certificates for unknown nonlinear dynam-ics beyond polynomials’, arXiv:2412.07232 .Xiao, W., Cassandras, C. G. & Belta, C. (2023), Safe Au-tonomy with Control Barrier Functions: Theory and Ap-plications , Springer. Yu, H., Moyalan, J., Vaidya, U. & Chen, Y. (2022), ‘Data-driven optimal control of nonlinear dynamics under safety constraints’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 6, 2240–2245. Zaker, M., Angeli, D. & Lavaei, A. (2025), Certified learn-ing of incremental ISS controllers for unknown nonlinear polynomial dynamics, in ‘Proceedings of the 64th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 6742–6747. Zaker, M., Angeli, D. & Lavaei, A. (2026), ‘Data-driven incre-mental gas certificate of nonlinear homogeneous networks: A scenario approach with noisy data’, arXiv:2507.18141v2 

.Zaker, M., Nejati, A. & Lavaei, A. (2025 a), ‘Data-driven safety certificates of infinite networks with unknown mod-els and interconnection topologies’, arXiv:2507.10979 .Zaker, M., Nejati, A. & Lavaei, A. (2025 b), From data to global asymptotic stability of unknown large-scale net-works with provable guarantees, in ‘Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control’, pp. 1–14. Zamani, M. & Arcak, M. (2018), ‘Compositional abstrac-tion for networks of control systems: A dissipativity ap-proach’, IEEE Transactions on Control of Network Sys-tems 5(3), 1003–1015. Zhang, H., Wu, J., Vorobeychik, Y. & Clark, A. (2023), ‘Exact verification of ReLu neural control barrier func-tions’, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 

36 , 5685–5705. Zhang, R. Y. & Lavaei, J. (2018), Efficient algorithm for large-and-sparse LMI feasibility problems, in ‘Proceedings of IEEE Conference on Decision and Control’, pp. 6868– 6875. Zhang, Z., Ma, C., Soudijani, S. & Soudjani, S. (2024), For-mal verification of unknown stochastic systems via non-parametric estimation, in ‘Proceedings of the 27th Inter-national Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statis-tics’, Vol. 238, PMLR, pp. 3277–3285. Zhao, H., Zeng, X., Chen, T. & Liu, Z. (2020), Synthesizing barrier certificates using neural networks, in ‘Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Hybrid Systems: Computation and Control’, pp. 1–11. Zhao, H., Zeng, X., Chen, T., Liu, Z. & Woodcock, J. (2021), ‘Learning safe neural network controllers with barrier cer-tificates’, Formal Aspects of Computing 33 (3), 437–455. Zheng, J., Miller, J. & Sznaier, M. (2024), ‘Data-driven safe control of discrete-time non-linear systems’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 8, 1553–1558. Zhi, D., Wang, P., Liu, S., Ong, C.-H. L. & Zhang, M. (2024), Unifying qualitative and quantitative safety verification of DNN-controlled systems, in ‘Proceedings of International Conference on Computer Aided Verification’, Springer, pp. 401–426. Zhou, R., Quartz, T., De Sterck, H. & Liu, J. (2022), ‘Neural Lyapunov control of unknown nonlinear systems with sta-bility guarantees’, Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems 35 , 29113–29125. Zhu, F., Pati, T. & Yong, S. Z. (2025), ‘Learning safe data-driven control barrier functions for unknown continuous systems’, IEEE Control Systems Letters 9, 1736–1741. Zhuang, F., Qi, Z., Duan, K., Xi, D., Zhu, Y., Zhu, H., Xiong, H. & He, Q. (2021), ‘A comprehensive survey on transfer learning’, Proceedings of the IEEE 109 (1), 43–76. 

51