Title: A Unified Framework for Empowerment and Predictive Control

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.03563v1

Published Time: Mon, 05 Oct 2026 01:33:03 GMT

Number of Pages: 7

Markdown Content:
# A Unified Framework for Empowerment and Predictive Control 

Wooyoung Chung 1,∗, Tristan Shah 1,∗, Volodymyr Makarenko 1, Stas Tiomkin 1

Abstract — Sampling-based model predictive control (MPC) is a powerful approach to trajectory optimization, but its performance depends on an informative cost function that often requires substantial domain knowledge to design. An alternative is to derive objectives directly from the system dynamics. Em-powerment, defined as the channel capacity between an agent’s inputs and its future state, provides such a goal-agnostic objec-tive and has been shown to produce useful behaviors across a range of domains. However, existing empowerment-based controllers have two key limitations: empowerment is estimated using a virtual probing policy distinct from the executed control policy, obscuring its connection to the resulting behavior; and its computation typically requires second-order derivatives of the dynamics, limiting compatibility with standard MPC methods. We formulate empowerment using a single policy for both probing and acting, directly linking the empowerment objective to the executed behavior. The resulting objective requires only first-order derivatives and can be optimized with standard MPC solvers, either alone or in combination with a task-specific cost. We evaluate the proposed approach on classical control tasks and show that combining empowerment with task costs matches or exceeds the success rate achieved by either objective alone. Our formulation provides a practical bridge between standard MPC and intrinsically motivated control. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Model Predictive Control (MPC) [1] is a widely used control paradigm in which future system behavior is pre-dicted using a dynamical model and optimized over a finite time horizon. At each control step, MPC solves a finite-horizon optimization problem to predict outcomes, enforce constraints, and minimize a specified cost function, while executing only the first action before re-planning. Owing to its flexibility and principled handling of constraints, MPC is a powerful and practical tool for robotic control, particularly for complex, nonlinear, and high-dimensional systems. In this work, we consider sampling-based MPC, which evaluates candidate action trajectories through forward simulation and performs derivative-free optimization over the control sequence. Its performance, however, depends on an informative cost function. A cost that encodes only the task objective may be sparse, incomplete, or non-informative over large regions of the state space. It is therefore common to introduce additional terms, such as penalties on control effort, state deviation, or instability, to shape the optimization problem [2]. These terms are typically task-specific and hand-tuned, and their design can require substantial domain knowledge.         

> ∗Equal contribution.
> 1Department of Computer Science, Whitacre College of Engineer-ing, Texas Tech University.

{trisshah, wochung, vmakaren, stas.tiomkin }@ttu.edu 

(a) Self-recovery from a fallen configuration using MPC-based empowerment. 

(b) MPC-based empowerment remains stable during self-recovery, unlike standard empowerment. 

Fig. 1: Goal-agnostic self-recovery using MPC-based em-powerment. (a) The proposed MPC-based empowerment controller recovers from a fallen configuration and stabilizes the hopper without a task-specific recovery objective. (b) The corresponding empowerment values remain stable under MPC-based empowerment, while standard empowerment, which relies on second-order derivatives for control, exhibits large oscillations and fails to stabilize the system. An alternative is to derive the optimization objective di-rectly from the system dynamics. Empowerment is one such objective, formalized as the channel capacity between an agent’s actions and its future states [3], [4]. This information-theoretic objective has been shown to induce meaningful behaviors across a range of settings, including discrete [5] and continuous control [6], [4], embodied agents, and multi-agent systems [7]. These results motivate empowerment as a general-purpose, goal-agnostic control objective. Ex-isting empowerment-based control methods, however, have important practical limitations. They typically rely on two distinct policies or action distributions: one for “probing” the dynamics to estimate empowerment and another for executing control. This separation creates a mismatch with sampling-based MPC, which evaluates and selects control actions using a common trajectory distribution. It can also increase sampling requirements and obscure the relationship between the empowerment objective and the resulting control behavior. We address this gap by formulating empowerment as a trajectory-level objective within sampling-based MPC. arXiv:2610.03563v1 [cs.RO] 2 Oct 2026 Our approach unifies probing and control into a single action distribution, allowing the same sampled trajectories to support empowerment estimation and control optimization. This improves sampling efficiency and directly connects the empowerment objective to the executed control behavior. Importantly, sampling-based MPC performs derivative-free optimization over the control sequence. Derivatives are required only to estimate empowerment through sen-sitivity analysis of the dynamics. Standard empowerment-based controllers require an additional differentiation of the empowerment estimate to obtain the control law, resulting in second-order derivatives of the dynamics [4]. By instead optimizing empowerment directly as an MPC objective, our formulation requires only the first-order sensitivities used to estimate empowerment. This yields a natural integration of empowerment with derivative-free trajectory optimization while reducing the derivative order required for control. Our main contributions are as follows: 1) We introduce an empowerment formulation based on a 

single action distribution for both probing and control, directly connecting empowerment estimation to the executed control behavior. 2) We integrate empowerment with sampling-based MPC, using first-order dynamics sensitivities to estimate em-powerment and derivative-free trajectory optimization for control. This avoids the second-order derivatives required by existing empowerment-based controllers [4] and improves sampling efficiency by using the same trajectory samples for empowerment estimation and control. 3) We show that the proposed formulation naturally com-bines intrinsic empowerment with task-specific costs along the same trajectories, and demonstrate that the combined objective can improve control performance relative to either objective alone. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sections II and III review empowerment-based control and sampling-based predictive control, respectively, and identify the algorithmic gap between the two formulations. Section IV presents our MPC-based empowerment formulation and its integration with task-specific control objectives. Section V provides an empirical evaluation of the proposed method. Finally, Section VI discusses the results, limitations, and directions for future work. Our code is publicly available on GitHub .II. E MPOWERMENT 

Standard empowerment-based controllers [8], [3], [9], [10], [11], [12], [4], [13] rely on two separate action dis-tributions, one for evaluating empowerment by probing, and the other to derive optimal actions. In this section, the linear Gaussian formulation for empowerment estimation and control [4] is shown in order to highlight this discrepancy. Our proposed solution, which unifies probing and acting, is introduced in Section IV. Given nonlinear discrete-time dynamics: 

xt+1 = f (xt, u t), (1) with states xt ∈ Xdx and actions ut ∈ U du . Empowerment of the state, x0, is defined as the maximal mutual information between future states and action sequences: 

E(x0) = max  

> π(·| x0)

I[XT ; U0: T −1 | x0]. (2) We use capital and small letters for random variables and their specific realizations, respectively. For example, X and 

U are RV, while x and u are their respective specific values. Here: In Equation (2), maximization is over the probing pol-icy π(U T −10 |x0) which explores virtual open-loop action sequences where U0: T −1 = U0, · · · , U T −1

. The result of the channel capacity calculation in Equation (2) is interpreted as the maximal achievable volume of final states xT by the optimal choice in probing distribution. Effectively, this represents the number of options available to the agent in the future. There are three steps in the derivation of empowerment based controllers in continuous domains, shown in the three following subsections and summarized in the Algorithm (1). 

A. Dynamics as a Communication Channel 

A state T -steps in the future, xT , driven by a control sequence, can be expressed by iterated dynamics, 

xT = f T −1(x0, u 0: T −1), (3) where f T −1 is the T −1 times iterated dynamics in Equation (1). The final state xT is expressed as a linear Gaussian channel through linearization of f T −1 around zero actions, 

0 .

= 00: T −1:

xT = f T −1(x0, u 0: T −1)

≈ f T −1(x0, 0) + FT (x0, 0) · u0: T −1,

where FT (x0, 0) is the Jacobian of f T −1 with regard to 

u0: T −1, evaluated along a nominal action sequence ¯u0: T −1 =

0 in state x0. To ensure finite channel capacity a small amount of noise is added to the final state, ϵ ∼ N (0, Σϵ):

xT ≈ f T −1(x0, 0) + Ft(x0, 0)u0: T −1 + ϵ (Channel ) (4) The probing policy π is assumed to be a multivariate Gaussian distribution centered on a mean control sequence of zero actions: 

π(U0: T −1|x0) := N (0, Σu0: T −1 ), (5) where Σu0: T −1 is the covariance matrix of the open-loop control sequence. 

B. Channel Capacity via Water-filling 

Applying Equation (4) to Equation (2) under the assump-tion of a Gaussian probing policy in Equation (5) enables the calculation of empowerment by the water-filling algorithm. In this setting, the optimization is over the covariance matrix of the probing policy, Σu0: T −1 :

E(x0, 0) = max  

> Σu0: T−1

12 ln |ΣxT |, (Water-filling )

ΣxT = FT (x0, 0)Σ u0: T −1 FT (x0, 0)⊤ + Σ ϵ

(6) Algorithm 1 Classical Empowerment Controller  

> 1:

Input: model f , current state x, planning horizon T 

> 2:

repeat  

> 3:

Estimate empowerment as channel capacity:  

> 4:

E(x, 0) ← max π I[XT ; U0: T −1|x] 

> 5:

Derive action in the direction of the gradient:  

> 6:

u∗(x) ∝ f ⊤ 

> u

· ∇ xE(x, 0) (2nd order controller)  

> 7:

Apply the action to dynamics:  

> 8:

x ← f (x, u ∗(x))  

> 9:

until convergence at salient states where ΣxT is the covariance of the final state xT . For notational simplicity we omit the functional dependency of 

ΣxT on x0 and ¯u0: T −1 when clear from context. The solution in Equation (6) returns the value of empowerment (channel capacity) under the optimal probing covariance matrix [14]. Crucially, in this formulation the water-filling algorithm optimizes only Σu0: T −1 , while the mean action sequence, 

¯u0: T −1 = 0, remains unaffected. In our novel method, the latter restriction is removed to allow ¯u0: T −1 to affect channel capacity. 

C. Controller via The Empowerment Principle 

The empowerment principle posits that meaningful behav-ior emerges when an agent pursues states with high empow-erment [8], [3], [4]. This principle suggests a controller based on gradient ascent: 

u∗ 

> t

(x) ∝ f ⊤ 

> u

· ∇ xE(x, 0) (Action) (7) where the control gain fu = ∂f (x,u ) 

> ∂u

is the partial derivative of the dynamics with respect to control. It provides aheuristic on how to map the gradient of empowerment with respect to the state into the control space of the agent. The optimal action in Equation (7) is applied to the dynamics, which increases empowerment, xt+1 =

f (xt, u ∗ 

> t

(x)) . These three steps, ( Channel, Water-Filling, Action ) are repeated at xt+1 . This scheme (summarized in Algorithm 1) has been demonstrated in a range of control problems [8], [3], [10], [12], [4]. One limitation of this formulation is that the actual control action, u∗ 

> t

(x), in Equation (7), and the virtual actions from the probing policy in Equation (5) are disconnected. The virtual actions do not drive dynamics, but rather, they probe the channel around the nominal trajectory induced by the constant zero action sequence. In contrast, in predictive control, the cost is evaluated under actual control sequences, which are used in the dynamics. III. M ODEL PREDICTIVE CONTROL 

Sampling-based (zero-order) predictive control methods [15], [16], [17] optimize finite-horizon action sequences by directly evaluating candidate rollouts under a forward model, avoiding reliance on gradients of the dynamics [1], [18], [19], [20], [21]. These planners maintain a distribution over ac-tions, sample trajectory rollouts, and update the distribution to maximize predicted cumulative return. This makes them particularly effective for nonlinear, discontinuous, or contact-rich systems, while their natural amenability to parallel simulation renders them well suited for real-time MPC. A key challenge in combining MPC with existing empow-erment methods is the mismatch in how action distributions are used. Standard empowerment formulations [4], [6] esti-mate channel capacity through virtual probing actions, while control actions are derived separately, typically through em-powerment gradients. This separation leads to incompatible action representations, increased sampling complexity, and difficulties integrating empowerment with MPC objectives that rely on a single action distribution to jointly evaluate future costs and select actions. Bridging this gap requires reformulating empowerment so that both empowerment and the task objectives can be evaluated coherently within the same predictive sampling framework. IV. P ROPOSED METHOD 

In classical empowerment [4], the nonlinear system dy-namics are linearized around a zero control sequence to form a tractable communication channel. The resulting nominal trajectory is passive, while a probabilistic probing policy π

explores action sequences within a local neighborhood (or “tube”) around this trajectory. This assumption is reasonable for sufficiently small control magnitudes, where the linear approximation remains accurate. However, this formulation introduces ambiguity in selecting the actions actually exe-cuted by the agent, typically necessitating heuristic action selection rules such as those in Equation (7). Moreover, classical empowerment does not naturally support planning over trajectories or straightforward integration with task objectives. In our framework, classical empowerment is recast as a trajectory optimization problem by allowing the probing policy to have a nonzero mean. Specifically, the probing policy in Equation (8) is defined as a Gaussian distribution centered at a mean control sequence ¯u0: T −1, which need not be zero. This formulation enables the probing policy to explore locally around a nominal trajectory induced by 

¯u0: T −1, while simultaneously allowing the mean control sequence itself to be optimized so as to guide the agent toward states with higher empowerment. 

π(U0: T −1|x0) := N (¯ u0: t−1, Σu0: t−1 ) (8) The mean control sequence ¯u0: T −1 is iteratively updated to maximize Equation (9), and the first action of the optimized sequence is applied to the system. 

E(x0, ¯u0: T −1) = max  

> Σu0: T−1

12 ln ΣxT (9) The covariance matrix of the final state ΣxT is given by Equation (10), which demonstrates the functional depen-dency on the mean control sequence. 

ΣxT = FT (x0, ¯u0: T −1)Σ u0: T −1 FT (x0, ¯u0: T −1)⊤ + Σ ϵ (10) A. Novel Formulation for Single-Policy Empowerment 

We formulate empowerment estimation as the following nested optimization problem: 

E(x0) = max  

> Σu0: T−1

max  

> ¯u0: T−1

12 ln |ΣxT |, (11) where the inner optimization shown in blue is over the mean of the action distribution ¯u0: T −1, which affects the channel, FT , while the outer optimization is over the action distributions covariance matrices. The objective in Equation (11) is a generalization of standard empowerment as it reduces to Equation (6) when ¯u0: T −1 = 0.Our proposed formulation allows the agent to affect chan-nel capacity by the action distribution mean through modu-lating the channel, which does not affect mutual information otherwise. This formulation eliminates the need to consider two different policies for developing empowerment-based controllers, enabling seamless integration with predictive sampling approach as summarized by Algorithm (2). As in Equation (10), ΣxT = Σ xT

 x0, ¯u0: T −1

 denotes the covariance of the final state. For notational simplicity, its dependence on x0 and ¯u0: T −1 is suppressed in the sequel. The outer maximization over Σu0: T −1 is carried out using the water-filling algorithm, as in classical empowerment. In our method, empowerment serves as an task-agnostic objective that evaluates the controllability of trajectories generated by candidate action sequences ¯u0: T −1. We employ zero-order MPC techniques, specifically, Random Shooting (RS), Predictive Sampling (PS) [16] the improved Cross-Entropy Method (CEM) [17], and Model Predictive Path Integral Control (MPPI) [15], to optimize ¯u0: T −1 with re-spect to this objective. Our approach unifies the probing policy with the actions executed by the agent and avoids the need for second-order dynamics derivatives. Trajectory optimization is instead performed using zero-order methods, while empowerment evaluation relies only on first-order linearizations. The following subsection describes the algorithm used to apply empowerment as an objective within online trajectory optimization. 

B. Algorithm 

We formulate empowerment as an task-agnostic objective that can be evaluated given the agent’s current state and a candidate control sequence, making it directly applicable within MPC. The resulting online MPC-based empowerment controller is summarized in Algorithm 2. The procedure begins with a nominal control sequence ¯u0: T −1, which is iteratively refined through the agent’s online interaction with the environment. At each timestep the total cost including 

E(x, ¯u0: T −1) and C(x, ¯u0: T −1) is calculated on N perturbed control sequences. At each timestep, the first control input of the optimized sequence is applied, after which the sequence is shifted for-ward to warm-start optimization at the next state. Algorithm 2 combines empowerment E and goal-related C objectives. The parameter β controls the relative importance of the task 

Algorithm 2 MPC-based Empowerment Controller  

> 1:

Input: dynamics f , current state x, horizon T , nominal controls ¯u0: T −1, number of samples N , task objective 

C, and intrinsic weighting β 

> 2:

repeat  

> 3:

for i = 1 to N do  

> 4:

Sample control sequence around nominal:  

> 5:

¯u(i)0: T −1 ← Sample(¯ u0: T −1) 

> 6:

Compute combined objective for sample i: 

> 7:

Ji ← βE(x, ¯u(i)0: T −1) + C(x, ¯u0: T −1) 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Update ¯u0: T −1 using {Ji}Ni=1  

> 10:

Apply the first control input:  

> 11:

x ← f (x, ¯u0) 

> 12:

Shift ¯u0: T −1 forward by one time step  

> 13:

until task completion objective during optimization. When running our formulation solely with empowerment as the objective, we set β = 1 

and remove the task objective C, yielding a purely intrinsic controller. In the next section, we present experimental results demonstrating the application of Algorithm 2 to control tasks in the presence and absence of an task objective. V. E XPERIMENTS 

We evaluate MPC-based empowerment in two key aspects. First, we demonstrate its capability to self-recover after a fall in the hopper environment without any task-specific cost. Second, we show that empowerment enhances control performance, particularly when the performance objective is sparse and uninformative. We validate this across pendulum stabilization tasks, including the single pendulum, cart-pole, and double pendulum. 

A. Intrinsic Self-Recovery 

The ability of MPC-empowerment to recover its balance after being dropped from a height above the ground is shown in Figure 1a. Initially the hopper falls to the ground in an un-controllable position. However, MPC-empowerment guides the agent to occupy the most controllable state. The agent is able to self-recover from the fall and move into a crouched position. The agent is able to maintain stability indefinitely in this highly controllable position. Surprisingly, empowerment discovers that the crouching is more controllable than the fully straight upright position. While the proposed MPC-based empowerment is able to synthesize intelligent behavior, standard empowerment is unable to do so. Despite having access to second-order gradi-ents of the dynamics, standard empowerment does not scale well to high-dimensional environments such as the Hopper. The poor performance of the hopper is demonstrated in Figure 1b, which plots the corresponding values of empow-erment during online interaction. MPC-based empowerment is smooth and stable, while standard empowerment is highly noisy and falls to a low value. B. Improved Uptake of Task Objective 

We validate the claim that empowerment can assist in the acquisition of task objectives in Table I. In this setting we deal with sparse task costs which are far less informative than dense ones. Sparse performance metrics are notoriously difficult to optimize due to the low probability of encoun-tering useful error signals during state-space search [22]. In both single pendulum and cart pole we define the sparse indicator cost: 

r(xt) = 1 {| angle( xt) − π| ≤ τ } (12) which indicates whether the pendulum is within a cone around the upright position. This objective is particularly dif-ficult because the pendulums start in the downward position and must execute a multi-step swing-up maneuver before receiving any informative feedback signal. In all experiments we used τ = 0 .1. In the double pendulum, a similar objective is used, except the requirement is that both links must be in the upright position simultaneously. The overall task objective is evaluated as the accumulated sparse cost over the prediction horizon: 

C(x0, ¯u0: T −1) =  

> T−1

X

> t=0

r(xt).

Since the instantaneous sparse cost takes takes binary values in {0, 1}, its temporal average directly corresponds to a task success rate. These are the values plotted in Table I. In Figure 2 we plot r(xt) over time averaged over 10 runs. When guided strictly by the sparse task cost (setting 

β = 0 ), the MPC framework fails to swing up and stabilize any of the pendulum systems, regardless of the sampling algorithm used. As shown in Figure 2, optimizing solely for the task cost yields no meaningful control behavior. In contrast, MPC-empowerment alone achieves a moderately high success rate without explicit access to the task cost. This behavior is expected from empowerment controllers because they are known to seek out states that are highly controllable, such as the upright position [4], [3], which is congruent with our selected goal state. Finally, combining empowerment with the sparse task cost improves task success rates across all sampling algorithms, as detailed in Table I. VI. D ISCUSSION 

This work proposes a unified framework that bridges empowerment with MPC. By representing probing and control through a single action distribution, we eliminate a long-standing conceptual and algorithmic separation in empowerment-based control. This unification enables em-powerment to be integrated as a primary objective within predictive control, allowing task-agnostic capacity metrics and task-specific costs to be evaluated coherently over a shared horizon. Our empirical results demonstrate that this formulation significantly improves closed-loop performance and stabilization under sparse feedback. Furthermore, it unlocks emergent control behaviors in underactuated and high-dimensional systems that were previously unexplored using empowerment. 

A. Unification of Probing and Control Distributions 

A central contribution of this work is the removal of the distinction between virtual probing actions and executed con-trol actions that has characterized prior empowerment-based controllers. In classical formulations [4], empowerment is estimated using a zero-mean probing distribution that does not reflect the system’s nominal trajectory, while control actions are derived separately via gradient-based or auxiliary updates. This separation increases algorithmic complexity and fundamentally conflicts with predictive control methods, which rely on a single distribution to evaluate future out-comes and select actions. Our formulation resolves this mismatch by allowing the probing distribution to have a nonzero mean and by directly optimizing that mean using MPC-style trajectory optimiza-tion. As a result, empowerment estimation and action exe-cution become two aspects of the same optimization process rather than separate stages. This unification ensures that the exploratory actions used to compute channel capacity align with the control inputs applied to the system, enabling seam-less integration with sampling-based MPC methods such as Predictive Sampling and the Cross-Entropy Method (CEM). Conceptually, this reframes empowerment from a local, state-dependent quantity into a trajectory-level objective that can be optimized online. 

B. First Order Control 

Another important advantage of the proposed framework is its computational efficiency compared to classical empow-erment controllers. Previous empowerment-based controllers in continuous domains typically require second-order deriva-tives of the dynamics in order to map empowerment gradients into control actions. Such methods are often impractical for real-time control, especially in high-dimensional systems where second-order derivatives are expensive, numerically unstable, or unavailable. In contrast, our approach relies on zero-order trajec-tory optimization for control and only first-order lineariza-tions for empowerment evaluation. This significantly re-duces computational overhead and aligns well with modern MPC pipelines used in robotics. The resulting controller is therefore better suited for real-time applications, where low latency and robustness are critical. This distinction is particularly relevant for scaling empowerment-based control to complex robotic platforms with large state and action spaces. 

C. Improved Uptake of Task Objective 

Our empirical results support the hypothesis that task-agnostic objectives facilitate the acquisition of task-specific performance goals [23]. Across all evaluation environments, combining empowerment with a sparse task cost consistently improves closed-loop performance, accelerating convergence to the upright equilibrium and enhancing stability compared to empowerment alone. On its own, the sparse task cost Task Random Shooting Predictive Sampling CEM MPPI Empowerment Combined Empowerment Combined Empowerment Combined Empowerment Combined Single Pendulum 50% 95% 49% 78% 59% 100 % 23% 93%                 

> Cart Pole 22% 79% 81% 100 %76% 99% 24% 60%
> Double Pendulum 0% 0% 0% 86 %3% 46% 0% 0%

TABLE I: Success rate comparison between trajectory optimization guided strictly by task-agnostic empowerment (Empowerment) versus combined optimization with empowerment and the sparse task cost (Combined , β = 0 .0001 ) across the single pendulum, cart-pole, and double pendulum environments. All systems are initialized in the inverted (downward) equilibrium position. The success rate is defined as the temporal average of the indicator cost in Equation (12) evaluated after the initial swing-up transient phase, with statistics computed over 10 independent random seeds. A higher success rate reflects increased residence time within the target tolerance region around the upright equilibrium. When optimizing strictly under the sparse task cost ( β = 0 ), all sampling algorithms fail to solve the tasks due to the low probability of sampling a swing-up trajectory that hits the target set. Notably, the combined cost formulation consistently outperforms empowerment alone across all environments. 

Fig. 2: Success rate on cart pole during online MPC interac-tion with the CEM algorithm. Mean and standard error are reported over 10 random seeds. Success rate is determined by the agent’s ability to stay within a π ± τ (rad) cone in the upright position. Guided strictly by the sparse task cost ( β = 0 ), the controller fails to execute the swing-up maneuver. This is the typical behavior we observed in our experiments across all environments. provides an insufficient gradient signal to guide optimiza-tion. Only when augmented with empowerment does the controller reliably stabilize the system. This finding carries important practical implications for control design. Constructing dense stage-cost functions that fully specify complex system behavior is often difficult and task-dependent. Empowerment provides an objective, task-agnostic signal that naturally biases trajectory optimization toward highly controllable and stable regions of the state space, effectively smoothing the optimization landscape for model predictive control. When paired with sparse or un-informative primary costs, this auxiliary capacity metric guides trajectory sampling and improves robustness without requiring labor-intensive cost engineering. VII. C ONCLUSION 

In this work, we introduced a novel formulation of em-powerment maximization within the framework of MPC. Our results demonstrate that empowerment can serve as an effective task-agnostic objective, enabling the synthesis of complex behaviors—such as self-righting in underactu-ated, high-dimensional systems—and significantly acceler-ating convergence under sparse performance costs. These findings indicate that empowerment-guided predictive con-trol can induce coherent, goal-directed behavior even in the absence of dense task supervision. Despite these promising results, several limitations remain. First, we observed that MPC-based empowerment is highly sensitive to hyperparameter choices, particularly the planning horizon. Determining an appropriate horizon remains an open challenge not only in our setting but in empowerment-based control more broadly [4], [3], [6]. It is generally unclear how far into the future an agent must plan to produce stable and intelligent behavior. Importantly, increasing the planning horizon does not monotonically improve perfor-mance. This non-monotonic relationship complicates both tuning and theoretical understanding. Second, although the proposed formulation benefits from relying on first-order rather than second-order derivatives, we found that MPC-based empowerment requires a large number of parallel rollouts to achieve stable optimization, particularly in more complex environments. In contrast, zero-order MPC guided by a well-engineered task objective can often solve challenging tasks such as locomotion and dexter-ous object manipulation with comparatively fewer samples. This discrepancy suggests that, while empowerment high-lights controllable aspects of the state space, its optimization landscape in high-dimensional settings may be substantially more complex than that induced by carefully designed task objectives. To scale empowerment to higher-dimensional systems, further methodological advances are required. More ro-bust empowerment estimators, potentially diffusion-based approaches, that do not rely on linear-Gaussian assumptions could enable richer and more expressive probing distribu-tions. Alternatively, exploring fundamentally different for-mulations of intrinsic motivation may prove fruitful. For example, recent work has proposed an intrinsic metrics based on Kolmogorov–Sinai entropy [24], a dynamical system level quantity that avoids the ambiguity associated with maintain-ing separate action distributions. Such directions represent promising avenues for improving scalability, robustness, and conceptual clarity of task-agnostic control frameworks. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

T.S. was supported by the Koh Family Scholarship. S.T. was supported in part by NSF Award (2513350) and Alliance Innovation Lab in Silicon Valley. REFERENCES [1] J. Richalet, A. Rault, J. L. Testud, and J. Papon, “Model predictive heuristic control: Applications to industrial processes,” Automatica ,vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 413–428, 1978. [2] S. Ibrahim, M. Mostafa, A. Jnadi, H. Salloum, and P. Osinenko, “Comprehensive overview of reward engineering and shaping in advancing reinforcement learning applications,” IEEE Access , vol. 12, pp. 175 473–175 500, 2024. [3] C. Salge, C. Glackin, and D. Polani, “Empowerment: An introduction,” in Guided Self-Organization: Inception , ser. Emergence, Complexity and Computation, M. Prokopenko, Ed. Springer, 2014, pp. 67–111, overview of empowerment and applications. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1310.1863 [4] S. Tiomkin, I. Nemenman, D. Polani, and N. Tishby, “Intrinsic motivation in dynamical control systems,” Physical Review X Life ,vol. 2, no. 3, p. 033009, 2024. [5] S. Tiomkin, C. Salge, and D. Polani, “Process empowerment for robust intrinsic motivation,” Journal of Physics: Complexity ,vol. 6, no. 3, p. 035011, aug 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //doi.org/10.1088/2632-072X/adf2ec [6] M. Karl, P. Becker-Ehmck, M. Soelch, D. Benbouzid, P. van der Smagt, and J. Bayer, “Unsupervised real-time control through varia-tional empowerment,” in Robotics Research , T. Asfour, E. Yoshida, J. Park, H. Christensen, and O. Khatib, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 158–173. [7] V. Kopio, “Improving coupled empowerment maximization agent performance,” 2023. [8] A. Klyubin, D. Polani, and C. Nehaniv, “Empowerment: a universal agent-centric measure of control,” in 2005 IEEE Congress on Evolu-tionary Computation , vol. 1, 2005, pp. 128–135 Vol.1. [9] F. Leibfried, S. Pascual-Diaz, and J. Grau-Moya, “A unified bellman optimality principle combining reward maximization and empowerment,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 2019, combining empowerment with extinsic reward within a Bellman framework. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1907. 12392 [10] F. Massari, M. Biehl, L. Meeden, and R. Kanai, “Experimental evidence that empowerment may drive exploration in sparse-reward environments,” arXiv preprint , vol. abs/2107.07031, 2021, empirical evidence for empowerment-driven exploration. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.07031 [11] S. Dai, W. Xu, A. Hofmann, and B. Williams, “An empowerment-based solution to robotic manipulation tasks with sparse rewards,” 

arXiv preprint , vol. abs/2010.07986, 2020, empowerment for intrinsic motivation in robotic manipulation. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.07986 [12] H. Cao, F. Feng, M. Fang, S. Dong, T. Yang, J. Huo, and Y. Gao, “Towards empowerment gain through causal structure learning in model-based reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint , vol. abs/2502.10077, 2025, empowerment integrated with causal structure learning. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.10077 [13] N. C. Volpi, D. De Palma, D. Polani, and G. Indiveri, “Computation of empowerment for an autonomous underwater vehicle,” in IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 49, no. 15. Elsevier, 2016, pp. 81–87, empow-erment computation applied to an autonomous underwater vehicle. [14] T. M. Cover, Elements of information theory . John Wiley & Sons, 1999. [15] G. Williams, A. Aldrich, and E. A. Theodorou, “Model predictive path integral control: From theory to parallel computation,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and Dynamics , vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 344–357, 2017. [16] T. Howell, N. Gileadi, S. Tunyasuvunakool, K. Zakka, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “Predictive sampling: Real-time behaviour synthesis with mujoco,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.00541 , 2022. [17] C. Pinneri, S. Sawant, S. Blaes, J. Achterhold, J. Stueckler, M. Rolinek, and G. Martius, “Sample-efficient cross-entropy method for real-time planning,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2021, pp. 1049– 1065. [18] P. Falcone, F. Borrelli, J. Asgari, H. E. Tseng, and D. Hrovat, “Predictive active steering control for autonomous vehicle systems,” 

IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology , vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 566–580, 2007. [19] P. H¨ am¨ al¨ ainen, J. Rajam¨ aki, and C. K. Liu, “Online control of simu-lated humanoids using particle belief propagation,” ACM Transactions on Graphics , vol. 34, no. 4, 2015. [20] C. Audet and W. Hare, Derivative-Free and Blackbox Optimization .Springer, 2017. [21] M. G. Na, S. H. Shin, and W. C. Kim, “A model predictive controller for nuclear reactor power,” Nuclear Engineering and Technology ,vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 399–411, 2003. [22] C. Schwarke, V. Klemm, M. v. d. Boon, M. Bjelonic, and M. Hutter, “Curiosity-driven learning of joint locomotion and manipulation tasks,” in Proceedings of The 7th Conference on Robot Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. Tan, M. Toussaint, and K. Darvish, Eds., vol. 229. PMLR, 06–09 Nov 2023, pp. 2594–2610. [Online]. Available: https: //proceedings.mlr.press/v229/schwarke23a.html [23] J. Schmidhuber, “Formal theory of creativity, fun, and intrinsic mo-tivation (1990–2010),” IEEE Transactions on Autonomous Mental Development , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 230–247, 2010. [24] T. Shah and S. Tiomkin, “Emergence of physical intelligence via con-trollable information production,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 39, Main Conference, 2026, oral presentation.