Real-time Whole-Body Motion Planning for Mobile Manipulators
Carrying Arbitrarily Shaped Payloads via Kinematically-Coupled SVSDF
Yisheng Li*1, Longji Yin*1, Tingrui Zhang2, Ruize Xue1, Haoda Zhu1, Nan Chen1, Siqi Liang1,
Yuxi Liu1, Fu Zhang1
Abstract— Mobile manipulators are increasingly tasked with
transporting large, non-convex payloads through cluttered en-
vironments, yet existing planners either oversimplify the pay-
load geometry or fail to handle the kinematic coupling between
manipulator links, leading to lost feasible space or stalled op-
timization. This letter presents a real-time whole-body motion
planning framework for mobile manipulators carrying arbitrar-
ily shaped payloads. The front-end employs a chain-decomposed
kernel-based collision check that preserves the true geometry of
the robot and payload, with compact storage and fast bit-level
queries. A mid-end preprocessing stage converts the front-end
path into a continuous trajectory enforcing smoothness and fea-
sibility, and executes it directly when collision-free to bypass the
costly back-end. When refinement is required, the back-end per-
forms trajectory optimization built on a Kinematically-Coupled
SVSDF (KC-SVSDF), which propagates collision-avoidance gra-
dients along the kinematic chain to produce coherent whole-body
escape directions. Ablation studies, comparative benchmarks
against state-of-the-art baselines, and real-world experiments
on a differential-drive mobile manipulator demonstrate that
the proposed framework reliably transports large, non-convex
payloads through tight passages and cluttered environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in joint motor technology have substan-
tially increased the payload capacity of mobile manipulators.
This expanded capability opens up new application scenarios,
such as relocating pianos or sofas in domestic settings and
handling die-cast aluminum car doors on factory floors. In
such tasks, however, the grasped payload is typically large and
non-convex, and conventional planners that treat it as a small
object and ignore its actual geometry render these applications
unsafe. This letter addresses the problem of real-time whole-
body motion planning for a mobile manipulator transporting
a large, non-convex payload through cluttered environments.
Generating a real-time, feasible, and high-quality trajectory
under these conditions remains a significant challenge. Exist-
ing optimization-based mobile manipulator planners [1], [2]
approximate both the robot body and the grasped payload
by a set of bounding spheres and rely on ESDF queries
for collision evaluation. This approximation is acceptable for
small payloads such as a water bottle, but breaks down for
large, non-convex objects: a bounding sphere cover sacrifices
∗Equal contribution.
1Y. Li, L. Yin, R. Xue, H. Zhu, N. Chen, S. Liang, Y. Liu and F. Zhang are
with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Hong Kong.
2T. Zhang, is with Institute for Interdisciplinary Information Sciences,
Tsinghua University.
Email:{yli385,ljyin,u3603390,haodazhumars,
cnchen,liangsiqi,liuyuxi}@connect.hku.hk,
m15351201779@163.com, fuzhang@hku.hk.
Corresponding Author: Fu Zhang.
Fig. 1: Real-world experiment1: the mobile manipulator traverses a cluttered
environment of randomly placed wooden columns while grasping a large
T-shaped carbon-fiber payload, demonstrating safe whole-body navigation
through tight gaps with an arbitrarily shaped object.
feasible space and often fails to find any valid path. To support
arbitrarily shaped robots, Zhang et al. [3] proposed the Swept-
Volume Signed Distance Field (SVSDF), but the formulation
is derived for a single rigid body. Applying it independently
to each link of a serial manipulator causes problems at both
ends of the pipeline: in the front-end, enumerating a kernel for
every joint-sample combination yields an intractable storage
cost; in the back-end, the per-link escape gradients ignore the
rigid coupling along the kinematic chain, so the direction that
frees one link can drive an upstream link into a new collision
and stall the optimizer.
To overcome these limitations, we propose a real-time
whole-body motion planning framework for mobile manip-
ulators carrying arbitrarily shaped payloads. The framework
consists of three modules: (i) a front-end path search using
a chain-decomposed kernel-based collision check that pre-
serves the true robot and payload geometry, with compact
storage and fast bit-level queries; (ii) a mid-end preprocess-
ing stage that, provisionally trusting the safety of the front-
end path, converts it into a continuous trajectory enforc-
ing only smoothness and feasibility, and executes it directly
when collision-free; and (iii) a back-end trajectory optimiza-
tion built on a Kinematically-Coupled SVSDF (KC-SVSDF),
which propagates collision-avoidance gradients along the
kinematic chain to produce coherent whole-body escape di-
rections. The framework is validated through ablation studies,
comparative benchmarks against state-of-the-art baselines,
and real-world experiments on a differential-drive mobile
arXiv:2608.07005v1  [cs.RO]  7 Aug 2026


manipulator. The main contributions of this letter are:
• We
proposed
a
chain-decomposed
kernel-based
collision-checking
scheme
that
preserves
the
true
geometry of the mobile manipulator and its grasped
payload, with storage scaling linearly in the per-joint
sample counts rather than multiplicatively.
• We develop a trajectory generation framework centered
on hierarchical optimization that enables real-time, con-
tinuous collision safety for wheeled mobile manipulator
while grasping arbitrarily shaped payloads.
• We proposed a Kinematically-Coupled SVSDF (KC-
SVSDF) method, which coupled multi-link systems by
enforcing consistency of per-link escape directions along
the kinematic chain.
• We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed
method in simulation and real-world experiments. The
code will be publicly released.
II. RELATED WORKS
Path planning for mobile manipulators is particularly chal-
lenging when the system transports a large, non-convex
payload through cluttered environments under real-time re-
planning requirements. The high dimensionality of the whole-
body configuration space, the heterogeneous kinematics of
the mobile base and the manipulator, and the non-convex
geometry of the grasped object jointly inflate the search space
and complicate collision checking. Existing approaches can
be broadly grouped into three categories.
Decoupled methods [4], [5] plan the base and the arm se-
quentially or hierarchically, so that each sub-problem lives in
a low-dimensional space. The strict ordering between the two
stages, however, yields sub-optimal plans and often fails in
narrow passages where base and arm motions must be tightly
coordinated. Whole-body samplers [6]–[9] instead plan di-
rectly in the joint configuration space of the base and the arm,
recovering the lost coupling at the cost of dimensionality that
makes them too slow for online re-planning. Kang et al. [10]
bridge the two paradigms with a hybrid scheme that de-
couples base and manipulator sampling in open space and
switches to joint sampling only in highly cluttered regions;
the method nevertheless inherits the slow convergence of
random sampling. Furthermore, their approach simplifies the
true geometry of the robot body and payloads, which prevents
finding feasible solutions in cluttered environments.
Optimization methods [1], [2], [11] first computes a discrete
whole-body initial path and then optimize it with a whole-
body trajectory optimizer to produce a smooth, continues,
feasible trajectory. These methods approximate the mobile
manipulator by a set of bounding spheres queried against a
signed distance field, and absorb the grasped payload into the
same sphere-based surrogate during both the front-end search
and the back-end optimization. When the payload is large and
non-convex, this approximation inflates the effective collision
geometry: feasible paths become hard to find in the front
end, and the back-end optimizer is prone to local minima,
ultimately precluding a smooth, kinematically feasible, and
continuously collision-free trajectory. Zhang et al. [3], [12]
address the geometry issue with a swept-volume SDF that
supports arbitrarily shaped robot. The formulation, however,
is derived for a single rigid body: applied independently to
each link of a serial manipulator, it produces per-link escape
gradients that ignore the rigid-body coupling along the kine-
matic chain, so the direction that frees one link can drive an
upstream link into a new collision, stalling the optimizer.
III. PRELIMINARY
A. Kinematic Model
In this letter, we consider a mobile manipulator system
consisting of a differential-drive mobile platform and a J-
DOF manipulator mounted on top of the platform. The state of
the mobile manipulator can be represented as x = [x⊤
b ,x⊤
m]⊤,
where xb = [px, py,φ]⊤∈R3 is the position and orientation
of the mobile base and xm = [q1,q2,...,qJ]⊤∈RJ is the joint
angle vector of the manipulator, whose end-effector rigidly
grasps an object to be transported. The control input consists
of wheel and joint angular velocities, u = [ωl,ωr, ˙x⊤
m]⊤, where
ωl and ωr are the left and right wheel angular velocities, and
˙xm is the joint velocity vector.
Combining the base flat output with the manipulator joint
configuration xm, we define the unified trajectory parameteri-
zation variable z := [σ⊤
b ,x⊤
m]⊤= [px, py,q1,...,qJ]⊤∈R2+J,
where the orientation is from φ = atan2(η ˙py,η ˙px). The kine-
matic model of the base can be expressed as:
ωl(r) =
1
2rw
 
2ηvb −
(+)
dwωb
!
,
(1a)
˙ωl(r) = αl(r) =
1
2rw
 
2ηab −
(+)
dwαb
!
,
(1b)
where rw is the radius of the driving wheels, dw is the wheel-
base, and η = ±1 is a direction indicator (+1 for forward
motion, −1 for backward motion). The quantities vb, ab,
ωb, and αb denote the linear velocity, linear acceleration,
angular velocity, and angular acceleration of the mobile base,
respectively [13], [14].
B. Trajectory parameterization
We use MINCO [15] for parameterization. The trajectory
is partitioned into N segments, where the i-th segment carries
a direction indicator ηi ∈{−1,+1} and is divided into Mi
polynomial pieces of degree 2s−1. The j-th piece of segment
i is defined as
zi,j(t) = c⊤
i,jβ(t −¯Ti,j−1),
t ∈[ ¯Ti,j−1, ¯Ti,j],
(2)
where ci,j ∈R2s×(2+J) are the polynomial coefficients, β(t) =
[1,t,...,t2s−1]⊤is the time basis, and ¯Ti,j = ∑j
k=1 Ti,k is
the cumulative time from the duration allocation Ti =
[Ti,1,...,Ti,Mi]⊤.
C. System Overview
In this letter, we propose a trajectory generation framework
for payload-carrying mobile manipulators. As illustrated in
Fig. 2, the framework consists of three hierarchical modules.
1) Front-End (Sec. IV): To accommodate grasped objects


of arbitrary shape, we employ a kernel-based fast collision-
checking algorithm that integrates Hybrid A* [16] for the
mobile base with a Multilayer Constrained RRT*-Connect [1]
for the manipulator. When this decoupled search fails, a
whole-body RRT* planner is invoked as a fallback to recover
a feasible path. 2) Mid-End (Sec. V): The discrete whole-
body waypoints produced by the front-end are converted
into a continuous trajectory. The resulting trajectory is either
directly executed if collision-free, or otherwise serves as an
initial guess for the back-end. 3) Back-End (Sec. VI): Using
the Kinematically-Coupled SVSDF (KC-SVSDF) together
with the initialization from the mid-end, we perform whole-
body trajectory optimization that jointly enforces continuous
collision avoidance for the arbitrarily shaped payload and the
system’s feasibility.
Failed
Front-End Path Search
Hybrid A*
(Base path search)
Multilayer Constrained
RRT*-Connect
(Manipulator states)
Whole-body RRT*
(Fallback in failed regions)
Chain-decomposed
kernel discrete collision check
Mid-End
Preprocessing
L-BFGS
Trajectory
Optimization
Feasibility 
Constraints
Swept-volume 
Continues
Collision Check
Back-End Trajectory
Optimization
Safety constraints
(KC-SVSDF)
Feasibility Constraints
(Kinematic,Self-collision)
LMBM Trajectory
Optimization
Safe
Failed
Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed planning framework.
IV. FRONT-END PATH SEARCH
A. Path Search Pipeline
Our front-end pipeline follows a decoupled search strategy:
Hybrid A* [16] generates a base path under nonholonomic
constraints, and a Multilayer Constrained RRT*-Connect [1]
determines the manipulator configuration at each base way-
point, with a whole-body RRT* invoked as a fallback when
this decoupled search fails. The output is a collision-free
path partitioned into segments with direction indicators ηi ∈
{−1,+1} for forward and reverse motions, which serves as
the initial guess for the mid-end. While these search algo-
rithms are well established, their efficiency and safety hinge
on the underlying collision-checking routine, which is the
focus of this section.
B. Existing Collision Checking
Many existing mobile manipulator planners [1], [2], [17]
check collisions in the front-end by querying an ESDF map at
points sampled on the robot body. Once an object is grasped,
it is rigidly attached to the end-effector and should logically
be treated as part of the robot, yet most planners reduce it
to a bounding sphere or a convex surrogate. This point-and-
primitive approximation discards the object’s true geometry;
to compensate, planners inflate the surrogate conservatively,
but the over-inflation frequently rejects feasible configura-
tions, especially when the payload is large and non-convex.
A recent approach [3], [18] avoids this approximation by
encoding the robot and the environment on a common voxel
grid as a pair of bit-packed kernels: a robot kernel Krobot that
captures the true robot geometry, and a map kernel Kmap that
mirrors the occupancy voxel map, with its boundary voxels
dilated outward by half the maximum extent of Krobot on
each side. This representation preserves arbitrary geometry,
and a collision query reduces to a fast boolean convolution
between the two kernels. The formulation, however, assumes
a single rigid body. A serial manipulator changes shape with
its joint configuration, so adapting the original form directly
would require enumerating one kernel per configuration, and
the number of stored kernels grows as O(∏J
j=0 Nj) in the per-
joint sample counts Nj, quickly becoming intractable.
Mobil base kernel
Yaw
samples
(orientation)
Yaw:0°
[1/18]
20°
[2/18]
40°
[3/18]
60°
[4/18]
• • • •
Manipulator kernel
Km
1
Km
2
• • • •
Km
j
•
 
•
 
•
•
 
•
 
•
•
 
•
 
•
α1,1
α1,2
α1,3
α2,1
α2,2
α2,3
αj,1
αj,2
αj,3
αj,1
αj,2
αj,N
Fj-1
qj-1
αj,i
Link j mesh
K  (αj,i )
j
m
Per-joint Kernel Generation
Link j-1 mesh
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3: Chain-decomposed kernel generation. (a) The mobile base kernel
is voxelized over discretized yaw samples in the world frame. (b) Each
manipulator link kernel K j
m is voxelized in its parent-link frame Fj−1 over
discretized samples {αj,1,...,αj,Nj} of its local joint variable, with the
grasped payload rigidly attached to the end-effector link.
C. Chain-Decomposed Kernel
To address this, we decompose the robot kernel into one
kernel per link along the kinematic chain and resolve queries
through forward kinematics, making the bit-packed represen-
tation tractable for a serial-link mobile manipulator. Con-
cretely, we write Krobot = {K0,K1
m,...,KJ+1
m
}, treating the
mobile base as K0 with its yaw angle q0 as the local joint vari-
able, the manipulator links as K1
m through J with local joint
angles q1,...,qJ, and the grasped payload as link J+1 rigidly
attached to the end-effector with no additional joint variable.
As shown in Fig. 3, each K j
m is voxelized in its parent-link
frame Fj−1 over discretized samples {αj,1,α j,2,...,αj,Nj} of
its local joint variable. At collision query time, given a base
pose xb = [px, py,q0]⊤and a manipulator configuration xm =
[q1,...,qJ]⊤, we retrieve the precomputed kernel for each link
of Krobot by selecting the sample α j closest to the correspond-
ing joint variable qj, and compute the parent-frame transforms
{T j−1
w
}J
j=0 once via forward kinematics. Each occupied voxel
of the retrieved kernels is then transformed to the world frame
by its T j−1
w
and tested against Kmap via a single bit lookup,
returning collision on the first hit. With bit-packed storage and


early exit, each query runs in O(|Krobot|) in the worst case but
terminates much sooner in practice, enabling high-throughput
collision checking in the front-end search.
V. MID-END TRAJECTORY PREPROCESSING
Directly solving the full whole-body optimization with the
SVSDF safety term is expensive. We therefore first run a
lightweight mid-end optimization that defers this term to the
back-end: trusting the front-end path for collision safety, it
enforces only smoothness and kinematic feasibility. Taking
the discrete front-end path as input, it produces a continuous
trajectory that is executed directly when collision-free, or
otherwise passed to the back-end as a warm initial guess.
A. Optimization Problem Formulation
Following the constrained optimal control formulation, we
cast the mid-end problem as:
min
{ci,j},{Ti} J0 =
Z Ttotal
0
ψ(t)⊤Wψ(t)dt +ρTTtotal,
(3a)
s.t.
ψ(t) = z(s)(t),∀t ∈[0,Ttotal],
(3b)
z[s−1](0) = ¯z0,z[s−1](Ttotal) = ¯zf ,
(3c)
z[s−1]
i
(Ti) = z[s−1]
i+1 (0),i = 1,...,N −1,
(3d)
Cdb

z(t),...,z(s)(t)

≤0,∀db ∈Db, ∀t ∈[0,Ttotal],
(3e)
Cdm

z(t),...,z(s)(t)

≤0,∀dm ∈Dm, ∀t ∈[0,Ttotal],
(3f)
where W ∈R(2+J)×(2+J) is a diagonal matrix penalizing
control effort and ρTTtotal is the time regularization term.
Equation (3b) defines the control input ψ(t) as the s-th
derivative of the trajectory, which serves as the integrand of
the control-effort cost in (3a). Equations (3c) and (3d) impose
the boundary conditions and the Cs−1 continuity at segment
connections, respectively, where ¯z0 and ¯zf denote the pre-
scribed initial and terminal states. The remaining inequality
constraints (3e) and (3f) encode the differential base con-
straints Db = {db : ωl(r),αl(r),eb} and manipulator constraints
Dm = {dm : qj, ˙q j, ¨q j,em}, where eb and em are the pose
residuals to the front-end path explained in detail in Sec. V-B.
In MINCO [15] trajectories, the piecewise polynomial coeffi-
cients {ci,j} are uniquely determined by a set of intermediate
waypoint parameters Q ∈R(2+J)×(∑i Mi−1) together with the
time allocations {Ti}. We therefore reparameterize the opti-
mization variables from {ci,j} to Q, under which the boundary
conditions (3c) and the Cs−1 continuity constraints (3d) are
satisfied by construction.
B. Mid-end Constraints
The inequality constraints in (3e) and (3f) are reformulated
into penalty functions by constraint transcription method [19].
To prevent the mid-end trajectory from deviating excessively
from the front-end path, we introduce pose residual con-
straints that enforce proximity to the discrete full-state path
provided by the front-end, where each node is given by x =
[x⊤
b ,x⊤
m]⊤, xb contains the base position px, py and orientation
φb, and xm contains the manipulator joint positions q j. The
residual constraints are defined as:
Ceb(z(t)) = ∥pb(t)−pb,k(t)∥2 +wφ ∠
 φb(t),φb,k(t)
2 −ρ2
b,
(4a)
Cem(z(t)) = ∥xm(t)−xm,k(t)∥2 −ρ2
m,
(4b)
where ∥· ∥2 denotes the squared Euclidean norm of a vector,
k(t) indexes the nearest front-end node to time t, ∠(·,·)
denotes the shortest signed angular difference on S1, wφ > 0
is a scalar weight balancing the angular and translational
contributions, and ρb, ρm are the admissible deviation bounds
for the base pose and manipulator joint configuration, re-
spectively. Additionally, to ensure that the trajectory does not
exceed the tracking capabilities of the mobile manipulator, we
incorporate kinematic constraints on both the mobile base and
the manipulator. For the mobile base, we restrict the angular
velocity ωl(r) and acceleration αl(r) of the left and right wheels
to their maximum admissible values. For each manipulator
joint j ∈{1,...,J}, we impose limits on joint position qj,
velocity ˙q j, and acceleration ¨qj.
VI. BACKEND TRAJECTORY OPTIMIZATION
Whereas the mid-end in Sec. V trusts the front-end path
and only penalizes deviation from it, the back-end solves the
complete optimization problem in Eq. (3), explicitly enforcing
continuous collision avoidance for the mobile manipulator
together with its grasped payload of arbitrary shape. To this
end, we first review the swept volume signed distance field
(SVSDF) [3] in Sec. VI-A and identify its limitation when
applied directly to a kinematically coupled multi-link system.
We then propose the Kinematically-Coupled SVSDF (KC-
SVSDF) in Sec. VI-B to address this limitation, and finally
formulate the back-end safety penalty in Sec. VI-C.
A. Swept Volume SDF
For continuous, mesh-level collision evaluation along an
optimized trajectory, we build on the swept volume signed
distance field (SVSDF) proposed in [3]. Given a rigid body
with geometry R moving along a trajectory T (t), the swept
volume is the union of all configurations the body occupies
along the motion:
SV ≜
[
t∈[tstart,tend]
T (t)R,
(5)
where T (t) is a homogeneous rigid transformation, so T (t)R
denotes the body configuration at time t. The SVSDF at a
query point p is the signed distance from p to the boundary
FR(SV); equivalently, |SVSDF(p)| is the radius of the
largest open ball Bp(r) centered at p that does not intersect
FR(SV), with the sign taken positive outside SV and nega-
tive inside.
Computing this radius directly is difficult because SV is an
infinite union with no closed-form boundary. However, since
SV is the union over time of instantaneous configurations
T (t)R, the distance from p to SV equals the minimum, over
t, of its distances to each individual configuration. Each such
per-instant distance is in turn obtained by transforming p into


the body’s local frame via T −1(t) p and querying the static
SDF on R. This reduces the ball-radius problem to a one-
dimensional minimization over time, and following [3] we
adopt the resulting metric function
g(p) ≜
min
t∈[tstart,tend]SDFR T −1(t) p

,
(6)
which is a conservative SDF of SV: g(p) = SVSDF(p)
when p lies outside SV, and g(p) ≥SVSDF(p) when p lies
inside. The associated argmin time is denoted as
t∗(p) ≜argmin
t∈[tstart,tend]
SDFR T −1(t) p

.
(7)
The SVSDF is formulated for a single rigid body. A
mobile manipulator carrying a grasped object, however, is
a kinematic chain M = {R0,R1,...,RJ,RJ+1} comprising
the mobile base (R0), the manipulator links (R1,...,RJ),
and the grasped payload (RJ+1) rigidly attached to the end-
effector. A natural extension would be to construct a separate
swept volume for each rigid body R ∈M over the trajectory
segment T (ti,ti+1) and compute its SVSDF independently.
This per-body treatment, however, implicitly assumes that
each body can move on its own. For a serial manipulator
this assumption fails: realizing link j’s obstacle escape di-
rection requires actuating upstream joints that simultaneously
displace other rigidly connected links, which could produce
mutually contradictory per-link gradients that stall the opti-
mizer. We resolve this by coupling the per-link distance fields
through the kinematic chain, as introduced in Sec. VI-B.
B. Kinematically-Coupled SVSDF
To resolve the per-link inconsistency identified in Sec. VI-
A, we propose the KC-SVSDF, summarized in Algorithm 1
and illustrated in Fig. 4. The procedure walks down the
kinematic chain link by link, computing each link’s SVSDF
while constraining its escape direction to be consistent with
the directions already chosen by upstream links. Consistency
is tracked through a joint-space accumulator G ∈Rnq, reset to
zero at the start of each query and updated after each link’s
SVSDF is determined.
For each link j, we first evaluate g j(p) as defined in
Sec. VI-A (line 6). If p lies outside the swept volume (g j(p) >
0), the KC-SVSDF is taken as gj(p), and the spatial escape
direction −∇gj(p) is mapped to joint space through link j’s
geometric Jacobian J j and accumulated into G[0:j] (lines 8–
10). Otherwise, we run the iterative ball-shrinking loop shown
in Fig. 4: candidate samples on the ball surface (line 15) are
filtered by the kinematic-consistency rule (line 16)
∇(k)
q [i]·G[i] ≥0,
∀i ∈{j−2, j−1},
(8)
which early rejects any candidate whose induced motion
would push the two immediately upstream joints against the
consensus already established in G (the check is skipped for
j < 2) and do not evaluate its gj to improve the efficiency.
Among the surviving samples y, the worst violator g j in
sample y∗drives the radius update r ←r−gj (line 24), and the
loop terminates when g∗< ε, at which point −r is recorded
as link j’s KC-SVSDF (lines 21).
Algorithm 1 KC-SVSDF Computation
1: Input: query point p
2: Output: per-body KC-SVSDF values D ∈RJ+2
3: G ←0 ∈Rnq
4: D ←0 ∈RJ+2
5: for j = 0 to J +1 do
6:
gj(p) ←SVSDF(Rj, p,T )
7:
if g j(p) > 0 then
8:
∇(j)
q
←−J⊤
j ∇gj(p)
9:
G[0:j] ←G[0:j]+∇(j)
q [0:j]
10:
D[j] ←gj(p)
11:
continue
12:
end if
13:
r ←a big initial value
14:
loop
15:
Y ←uniform samples on the surface of Bp(r)
16:
y ←KINEMATICFILTER(Y,G, j)
17:
gj(y∗) ←argmaxgj(y)
18:
if g j(y∗) < ε then
19:
∇(j)
q
←J⊤
j (y∗−p)
20:
G[0:j] ←G[0:j]+∇(j)
q [0:j]
21:
D[j] ←−r
22:
break
23:
end if
24:
r ←r −g j(y∗)
25:
end loop
26: end for
27: return D
The resulting KC-SVSDF value D encodes coherent whole-
body escape directions that the kinematic chain can physically
realize, as visualized in Fig. 4(c): where independent per-link
SVSDF gradients (red) would drive upstream links back into
collision, the KC-SVSDF gradients (green) yield a consistent
whole-arm motion that clears the obstacle.
Computing the KC-SVSDF for mobile manipulator re-
quires solving the argmin-over-time search of Eq. (7) once
per link, which is costly across the J+2 links and the many
query points evaluated each iteration. We adopt a strategy that
exploits the rigid coupling of the chain to avoid this. Since
the manipulator links and the grasped payload are carried by
the base along a shared trajectory, the base’s translation domi-
nates their spatial motion, so each link’s closest-approach time
t∗(p) falls within a small, bounded offset of the base’s argmin
time t∗
0(p). We therefore solve Eq. (7) in full only for the base,
and confine the search for each remaining link {Rj}J+1
j=1 to the
narrow window [t∗
0(p)−∆t, t∗
0(p)+∆t], whose half-width ∆t
covers this offset. This turns J+2 full-segment searches into
one full search plus J+1 windowed searches, substantially
reducing the per-query cost.
C. Safety Constraints
The back-end shares the same trajectory parameterization,
smoothness objective, and kinematic feasibility constraints as
the mid-end in Eq. (3), and additionally enforces continuous


Evaluation Point
Sampling Point [k=consistent, g > 0]
Sampling Point [k=consistent, g < 0]
Sampling Point [k=inconsistent]
Radius for Next  Iteration
g > 0: Outer Tangent Sphere
g*:Max Evaluation Value
Obstacle
SVSDF Gradient
KC-SVSDF Gradient
(c)
(a)
(b)
Init
q*
g*
Iter:1
q*
g*
Iter:2
Fig. 4: (a) Iterative computation of the interior KC-SVSDF for the payload link, illustrated in 2D (the 3D case is analogous). Candidate samples on the current
ball are filtered by KINEMATICFILTER for upstream-joint consistency with G; surviving samples (green) outside SV yield metric values g (tangent-circle
radii). The worst violator g∗shrinks the ball radius for the next iteration, rapidly converging to the KC-SVSDF value inside SV. (b) Swept volume (light blue)
generated by the mobile manipulator transporting an arc-shaped payload along a trajectory. (c) When the payload collides with an obstacle, the traditional
SVSDF produces a per-link escape direction (red) that ignores the conflicting, whereas our KC-SVSDF propagates the gradient through the chain to yield a
kinematically consistent whole-body escape direction (green).
collision avoidance for the whole-body system through a KC-
SVSDF-based safety penalty. The goal is to ensure that the
swept volume SV of every link in mobile manipulator remains
clear of obstacles along the entire trajectory. Building on
the per-link KC-SVSDF values d stores in D computed in
Sec. VI-B, we require that, for every obstacle point near the
trajectory, the d exceeds a prescribed safety margin sthr. The
resulting penalty is
Js =
Nobs
∑
i=1
J+1
∑
j=0
L
 Gs
 d j(x i
obs)

,
(9a)
Gs(d) = max(0, sthr −d ),
(9b)
where d j(x i
obs) denotes the KC-SVSDF of link j at obstacle
point x i
obs, L(·) is a smooth penalty function (e.g., a cubic
barrier) that converts the violation into a differentiable cost,
and sthr > 0 is the user-specified safety margin. The candidate
obstacle points {x i
obs}Nobs
i=1 are pre-filtered by an Axis-Aligned
Bounding Box (AABB) test around the trajectory, so that only
obstacle voxels potentially intersecting any link’s swept vol-
ume are evaluated, while the kinematically-coupled gradients
propagated through d ensure that the back-end produces a
continuously collision-free trajectory for the mobile manip-
ulator and its arbitrarily shaped payload.
VII. EXPERIMENTS
We validate the proposed framework through both simula-
tion and real-world experiments. The simulation studies inves-
tigate the contribution of KC-SVSDF module via an ablation
study and benchmark the full system against state-of-the-
art baselines, while the real-world experiments demonstrate
the framework’s deployability and robustness on a physical
platform. All simulations and real-world experiments are per-
formed in the Robot Operating System (ROS) on an Intel
NUC with an i7-1360P CPU and 32 GB DDR4 memory.
TABLE I: Ablation Success Rate Results
hb (m)
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
Baseline
80%
35%
20%
0.00%
Ours
100%
100%
95%
80%
A. Simulation Experiments
1) Comparative Benchmark: We compare our full method
against two state-of-the-art trajectory-optimization baselines
for differential-drive mobile manipulators, REMANI [1] and
TOPAY [2], across two scenarios of increasing difficulty:
Tunnel, a structured corridor with regularly placed obstacles
(Fig. 6, left); and Forest, a cluttered environment containing
three bridge holes and forty-five randomly placed columns
(Fig. 6, right). The Tunnel scenario uses the same T-shaped
payload as the ablation study, while the Forest scenario uses
an elongated rectangular payload to stress-test the planner
with a larger grasped object.
TABLE II: Minimum SVSDF at Challenging Obstacles
Method
Obstacle 1
Obstacle 2
Obstacle 3
Tunnel
Ours
0.3145
0.1882
0.0714
TOPAY
0.2234
-0.0080
0.3438
REMANI
0.1477
-0.0390
0.3875
Forest
Ours
0.0706
0.1069
0.1598
TOPAY
0.0573
-0.0317
0.1167
REMANI
0.1764
-0.0077
0.1855
For each scenario, we report over 100 trials the success rate
and the average per-module computation time in Table III,
together with the minimum SVSDF value at the most three
challenging obstacles in Table II, which are labeled in Fig. 6.
The minimum SVSDF denotes the closest distance between
any robot link mesh and these obstacles across the entire
trajectory. A trial is counted as a success when the robot
reaches its global destination without collision. A positive
SVSDF value indicates that every robot link stays outside
the obstacles, whereas a negative value reports the penetration


depth. Our method achieves the highest success rate and the
lowest total planning time in both scenarios. This performance
gap stems from two compounding factors. First, both TOPAY
and REMANI rely on sphere-based collision checking, which
overapproximates the payload geometry and needlessly re-
jects feasible configurations in the front-end; this yields more
planning attempts and poorer initial values for the back-end
optimizer. Second, as illustrated in Fig. 6, neither baseline
accounts for the rigid coupling between manipulator links, so
when the robot carries a large payload, freeing one link drives
an upstream link into collision during trajectory optimization,
ultimately producing low success rates.
2) Ablation Study: We conduct an ablation study to vali-
date the KC-SVSDF safety formulation proposed in Sec. VI-
B. The baseline replaces the KC-SVSDF safety term in the
back-end with an independent per-link SVSDF [3], while
keeping the front-end, mid-end, and all other components of
the pipeline identical to the full method. This isolates the
contribution of the kinematic coupling and rules out improve-
ments arising from other modules.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5: The generated trajectory in ablation study. (a): With KC-SVSDF hb =
0.8m. (b):SVSDF-only hb = 1.0m.
The scenario is a bridge-hole passage with a T-shaped
payload rigidly grasped by the end-effector (Fig. 5). To probe
the boundary of each method’s capability, we sweep the
bridge clearance height hb from 1.1 m down to 0.8 m in steps
of 0.1 m. For each setting, we run 20 randomized trials and
report the success rate, defined as completing the traversal
without collision and within the time budget. The front-end
path searching is limited to 80ms and the optimization module
limited to 300ms. Results are summarized in Table I.
TABLE III: Simulation Benchmark
Method
Front-end
(ms)
Mid-end
(ms)
Back-end
(ms)
Total
(ms)
Succ
rate
Tunnel
Ours
2305
604
1253
4162
91%
TOPAY
3345
−
4533
7878
23%
REMANI
9186
−
2039
11225
29%
Forest
Ours
9024
1022
3567
13613 83%
TOPAY
8771
−
14407
23178
25%
REMANI
24233
−
7207
31440
17%
B. Real-World Experiments
Our hardware platform consists of an Agilex Piper 6-DOF
manipulator mounted on an Agilex Scout Mini differential-
drive base. State estimation for the base is provided by a
Livox MID-360 LiDAR running FAST-LIO2 [20], while the
manipulator joint states are read directly from the motor
TABLE IV: Results of the Real-world Experiment
Scene
Front-end
(ms)
Mid-end
(ms)
Back-end
(ms)
Total
(ms)
Length
(meter)
Tunnel
523.6
3464.3
5388
9375.9
19.477
Forest
782.6
4312.8
6346.2
11441.6
17.256
encoders. The 3D occupancy grid is maintained and updated
online using ROG-Map [21].
We build two complex scenarios on the physical platform
to validate the framework on real hardware platform. In the
first experiment shown in Fig. 7, the manipulator grasps an
elongated rectangular payload and traverses a narrow tunnel,
demonstrating safe whole-body navigation with a large object
under tight geometric constraints. In the second experiment
shown in Fig 1, the manipulator carries a T-shaped payload
through a forest of randomly placed wooden columns, demon-
strating real-time re-planning in cluttered, less structured en-
vironments, the final result is listed in Table IV.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
This letter presented a real-time whole-body planner for
mobile manipulators transporting arbitrarily shaped payloads.
Preserving true geometry recovers feasible space lost to
sphere-based approximations, while Kinematically-Coupled
SVSDF resolves the gradient inconsistency stalling per-
link swept-volume optimization. The framework outperforms
state-of-the-art baselines in success rate and computation
time, and reliably transports large, non-convex payloads in
real-world tests. Like all optimization-based planners, it re-
mains sensitive to local minima—especially for multi-link
rigidly coupled systems—depending on the front-end initial
guess; future work will incorporate topological path search to
provide diverse initial guesses toward the global optimum.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Wu, R. Wang, M. Song, F. Gao, J. Mei, and B. Zhou, “Real-
time whole-body motion planning for mobile manipulators using
environment-adaptive search and spatial-temporal optimization,” in
2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2024, pp. 1369–1375.
[2] L. Xu, C. Wong, M. Zhang, J. Lin, J. Hou, and F. Gao, “Topay:
Efficient trajectory planning for differential drive mobile manipulators
via topological paths search and arc length-yaw parameterization,”
2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02761
[3] J. Wang, T. Zhang, Q. Zhang, C. Zeng, J. Yu, C. Xu, L. Xu, and
F. Gao, “Implicit swept volume sdf: Enabling continuous collision-free
trajectory generation for arbitrary shapes,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 43,
no. 4, Jul. 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3658181
[4] V. Pilania and K. Gupta, “A hierarchical and adaptive mobile manipu-
lator planner with base pose uncertainty,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 39,
06 2015.
[5] S. Chitta, B. Cohen, and M. Likhachev, “Planning for autonomous
door opening with a mobile manipulator,” in 2010 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2010, pp. 1799–1806.
[6] S. Thakar, P. Rajendran, H. Kim, A. M. Kabir, and S. K. Gupta, “Ac-
celerating bi-directional sampling-based search for motion planning of
non-holonomic mobile manipulators,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2020, pp. 6711–
6717.
[7] L.
Janson,
E.
Schmerling,
A.
Clark,
and
M.
Pavone,
“Fast
marching tree: a fast marching sampling-based method for optimal
motion planning in many dimensions,” 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.3532


TOPAY
REMANI
Ours
1
2
3
2
1
3
Fig. 6: Qualitative comparison in two challenging environments: a narrow tunnel (left) and a dense forest of vertical rods (right). The number above each white
box in bottom row indicates the corresponding obstacle in Table II. The robot is a differential-drive mobile manipulator with a 6-DOF arm carrying a non-
convex T-shaped and an elongated rectangular payload. Red boxes (TOPAY, REMANI) highlight payload-obstacle collisions. Our method (bottom row) plans
over the kinematically-coupled swept volume of the full robot-payload system (teal envelope), achieving collision-free navigation through tight clearances in
both scenarios.
Fig. 7: The mobile manipulator transports an elongated rectangular payload
through a narrow corridor containing two inclined beam obstacles at different
orientations and one vertical obstacle.
[8] S. Karaman and E. Frazzoli, “Optimal kinodynamic motion planning
using incremental sampling-based methods,” in 49th IEEE Conference
on Decision and Control (CDC), 2010, pp. 7681–7687.
[9] V. Pilania and K. Gupta, “Mobile manipulator planning under
uncertainty in unknown environments,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 37, no. 2-3, pp. 316–339, 2018. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364918754677
[10] M. Kang, D. Kim, and S.-E. Yoon, “Harmonious sampling for mobile
manipulation planning,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2019, pp. 3185–3192.
[11] M.
Zucker,
N.
R.
Google,
A.
D.
Dragan,
M.
Pivtoraiko,
M.
Klingensmith,
N.
D.
Ratliff,
C.
M.
Dellin,
J.
A.
Bagnell,
S.
S.
Srinivasa,
A.
D.
Dragan,
S.
S.
Srinivasa,
P. Pa, and P. Pa, “Chomp: Covariant hamiltonian optimization
for
motion
planning,”
The
International
Journal
of
Robotics
Research, vol. 32, pp. 1164 – 1193, 2013. [Online]. Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:9427630
[12] T. Zhang, J. Wang, C. Xu, A. Gao, and F. Gao, “Continuous implicit
sdf based any-shape robot trajectory optimization,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
2023, pp. 282–289.
[13] M. Zhang, C. Xu, F. Gao, and Y. Cao, “Trajectory optimization for 3d
shape-changing robots with differential mobile base,” in 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2023,
pp. 10 104–10 110.
[14] M. Zhang, N. Chen, H. Wang, J. Qiu, Z. Han, Q. Ren, C. Xu, F. Gao, and
Y. Cao, “Universal trajectory optimization framework for differential
drive robot class,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and
Engineering, vol. 22, pp. 13 030–13 045, 2025.
[15] Z. Wang, X. Zhou, C. Xu, and F. Gao, “Geometrically constrained tra-
jectory optimization for multicopters,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 3259–3278, 2022.
[16] D. A. Dolgov, S. Thrun, M. Montemerlo, and J. Diebel, “Path planning
for autonomous vehicles in unknown semi-structured environments,”
The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 29, pp. 485 – 501,
2010.
[17] W. Wu, X. Zhou, F. Yan, S. Zhang, Y. Zhuang, and G. Xin, “Real-
time whole-body motion planning based on optimized nmpc in static
and dynamic environments for mobile manipulator,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
2025, pp. 20 115–20 122.
[18] Y. Li, L. Yin, Y. Cai, J. Liu, F. Zhu, M. Ma, S. Liang, H. Li,
and F. Zhang, “Efficient swept volume-based trajectory generation for
arbitrary-shaped ground robot navigation,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE,
2025, pp. 2076–2083.
[19] L.
Jennings
and
K.
Teo,
“A
computational
algorithm
for


functional inequality constrained optimization problems,” Automatica,
vol.
26,
no.
2,
pp.
371–375,
1990.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/000510989090131Z
[20] W. Xu, Y. Cai, D. He, J. Lin, and F. Zhang, “Fast-lio2: Fast direct lidar-
inertial odometry,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 38, no. 4, pp.
2053–2073, 2022.
[21] Y. Ren, Y. Cai, F. Zhu, S. Liang, and F. Zhang, “Rog-map: An efficient
robocentric occupancy grid map for large-scene and high-resolution
lidar-based motion planning,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2024, pp. 8119–
8125.
