1
CrossTracer: Cross-Embodiment Navigation via
VLA Model Reasoning and Trace Residuals
Adapting
Yao Wang1,2, Siyuan Wang2, Zhirui Sun3, Wenzheng Chi4, Liang Lin1, Jiankun Wang2,†, Wenjun Xu1,†
Abstract—Vision-language-action
(VLA)
models
provide
strong semantic priors for robot navigation, but they often
ignore embodiment-specific mobility constraints. A path that
is semantically plausible for one robot may be physically
infeasible for another. We propose CrossTracer, a hierarchical
framework for cross-embodiment navigation through adaptive
trace residuals. CrossTracer represents navigation plans as
normalized image-plane waypoints, forming a unified pixel-
space
interface
between
semantic
reasoning
and
physical
grounding.
First,
Vision-Language
Trace
Proposer
(VL-
Tracer) adapts a pretrained VLA model to predict an initial
navigation
trace
from
egocentric
observations
and
flexible
goal
specifications.
Second,
CE-Adapter
refines
this
trace
by
predicting
embodiment-conditioned
residual
corrections
from visual traversability cues, robot identity, and the initial
trace. To train the refinement module without costly manual
annotation,
Cross-Embodiment
RRT*
(CE-RRT*)
converts
panoptic segmentation into robot-conditioned traversability cost
maps and generates cost-minimizing pixel-space traces. We
evaluate CrossTracer on the NaviTrace benchmark, which tests
whether a model can generate embodiment-consistent navigation
traces from egocentric observations, language instructions, and
robot embodiment types. CrossTracer achieves a total score of
45.68, outperforming the strongest evaluated general-purpose
baseline, Gemini-2.5-Pro, by 10.01 points, corresponding to a
28.1% relative improvement. Real-world deployment on wheeled
and legged robots further shows improved navigation success
and execution efficiency.
Index
Terms—Vision-language-action
model,
cross-
embodiment navigation, trace residual learning, embodiment-
aware motion planning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Real-world robot navigation requires a policy to understand
high-level semantic goals while respecting the physical con-
straints of the robot in the execution process. Recent vision-
language-action (VLA) models provide strong semantic priors
for embodied decision making and navigation [1], [2], [3],
[4], but their outputs are often insufficiently grounded in
robot-specific mobility. The same instruction and observation
may imply different feasible routes for different platforms:
a legged robot may traverse rough terrain or small height
changes, whereas a wheeled robot may need to detour around
them, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Classical navigation systems
1 Peng Cheng Laboratory
2 Southern University of Science and Technology
3 Innovation Investment Research Institute
4 Soochow University
†
Corresponding
author.
Email:
wangjk@sustech.edu.cn,
xuwj@pcl.ac.cn
Fig. 1: Embodiment-aware navigation with heterogeneous robots.
For the same goal, legged and wheeled robots may follow different
feasible paths due to distinct mobility constraints. The lower panels
show their corresponding first-person observations, where red dashed
curves indicate the planned pixel-space traces.
and local planners can encode geometric safety and robot
constraints [5], [6], [7], but they typically lack the open-
vocabulary goal understanding and semantic flexibility of
foundation models. This mismatch brings an embodiment gap
between semantic navigation intent and physically executable
motion on heterogeneous robots.
Existing approaches address this gap from different direc-
tions, but limitations still remain. End-to-end VLA policies [4],
[8], [9], [10] map observations and goals directly to actions
or trajectories, which can entangle semantic reasoning, em-
bodiment constraints, and control in a single model. Such
coupling makes it difficult to adapt the same semantic plan
to robots with different traversability profiles. Hierarchical
navigation methods partially alleviate this issue by separating
high-level reasoning from lower-level grounding. For example,
recent pixel-space navigation systems [11] use vision-language
models to propose candidate paths and then select or score
them according to embodiment-specific affordances. However,
candidate selection can only choose among a finite set of
proposals and may fail when all candidates contain local
infeasible segments. More generally, training embodiment-
aware refinement models requires supervision that is costly
to obtain across diverse scenes and robot platforms.
Our key insight is that a 2D pixel-space navigation trace
can serve as a unified intermediate representation between
semantic intent and embodiment-aware physical grounding. A
arXiv:2608.06688v1  [cs.RO]  7 Aug 2026


pixel-space trace preserves the scene-level structure inferred by
a VLA model from an egocentric observation and a flexible
goal specification, while avoiding premature commitment to
the low-level control space of any particular robot. At the
same time, because the trace is spatially aligned with visual
traversability cues in the image, it can be refined by an
embodiment-conditioned module that reasons about which
region is feasible for a particular robot. This representation
therefore enables semantic proposal and physical adaptation
to be decoupled while still communicating through a common
coordinate interface.
To address the current gap, we propose CrossTracer, a
hierarchical VLA framework for cross-embodiment naviga-
tion through adaptive trace residuals. CrossTracer first uses
Vision-Language Trace Proposer (VL-Tracer), adapted from
a pretrained VLA model, to generate an initial embodiment-
agnostic semantic trace from an egocentric RGB observation
and flexible goal inputs, including language, pixel pose, or
both. It then applies CE-Adapter, an embodiment-aware re-
finement module that predicts residual corrections to the initial
trace. The adapter conditions on robot identity and visual
traversability cues through robot embeddings, Feature-wise
Linear Modulation (FiLM) layers, and trace-to-visual cross-
attention, allowing it to preserve the semantic intent of the
proposed trace while improving physical feasibility for the
target platform.
To train this refinement module without manually an-
notating embodiment-specific traces, we further introduce
Cross-Embodiment RRT* (CE-RRT*), an automated planner-
supervised labeling pipeline. CE-RRT* converts panoptic seg-
mentation into robot-conditioned traversability cost maps and
applies RRT* planning to synthesize cost-minimizing pixel-
space traces. These generated traces provide scalable super-
vision for learning embodiment-aware residual corrections
across different robot types and environments.
Overall, our main contributions are summarized as follows:
1) We
propose
CrossTracer,
a
hierarchical
cross-
embodiment navigation framework that uses normalized
pixel-space
traces
as
a
unified
interface
between
VLA-based semantic reasoning and robot-conditioned
physical grounding.
2) We develop CE-Adapter, an embodiment-aware refine-
ment module that predicts adaptive trace residuals from
visual traversability cues, robot identity, and the pro-
posed trace. To train this module without costly manual
annotation, we use CE-RRT*, an automated planner-
supervised pipeline that generates embodiment-specific
reference traces from semantic segmentation and robot-
conditioned cost maps.
3) We validate CrossTracer on the NaviTrace benchmark
and through real-world deployments on wheeled and
legged robots, showing that the proposed embodiment-
aware trace refinement strategy improves navigation
trace quality and physical execution reliability. Exper-
iment videos and more details can be found at https:
//lilduckkk.github.io/CrossTracer-Nav/.
II. RELATED WORK
Research related to CrossTracer can be organized into four
main directions: vision-language-action models for navigation,
pixel-space trace representations, embodiment-aware naviga-
tion, and planner supervision for learning-based navigation.
Together, these directions highlight the two central challenges
addressed in this work: generating semantically meaningful
navigation traces from multimodal goals and adapting them to
the physical constraints of heterogeneous robot embodiments.
A. Vision-Language-Action Models for Navigation
Large-scale robotic foundation models have shown strong
potential for language-conditioned robot decision making. RT-
1 and RT-2 learn policies that map visual observations and
language instructions to robot actions [1], [2]. RT-X, Open
X-Embodiment, Octo, and OpenVLA further scale generalist
robot policies using large cross-robot datasets and unified
policy architectures [12], [13], [3]. These models provide
useful semantic priors, but most of them are designed for
general robot action generation, where semantic reasoning,
embodiment constraints, and control are often learned within
a coupled policy.
For navigation, learning-based policies such as GNM, ViNT,
NoMaD, ViKiNG, MBRA, NavDP, and FlowNav learn scal-
able visual navigation behaviors from egocentric trajectories,
diffusion models, model-based relabeling, or flow match-
ing [14], [15], [16], [17], [18], [19], [20]. These methods
improve goal-directed navigation, but many of them focus
on image goals, geometric goals, or action-level navigation
policies rather than flexible multimodal goal specification.
Recent VLM and VLA navigation systems extend naviga-
tion beyond fixed geometric targets by supporting language
instructions, image goals, 2D poses, or their combinations.
LeLaN learns language-conditioned object navigation from
in-the-wild videos [21], NaVILA combines a VLA module
with locomotion skills for legged robot navigation [10], and
OmniVLA supports goal images, 2D poses, language prompts,
and multimodal combinations [4]. These systems improve
semantic goal understanding and multimodal goal interfaces,
whereas CrossTracer uses a VLA-derived module only to pro-
pose a semantic pixel trace and leaves embodiment-dependent
adaptation to a separate refinement module.
B. Pixel-Space Trace Representations
Mapless navigation aims to produce feasible navigation
directions or trajectories directly from onboard observations,
without relying on a prebuilt global map. Classical systems
often use geometric perception, local traversability maps, or
local planners such as DWA and TEB [5], [6]. Learning-based
methods such as MTG generate trajectories with traversability
and coverage constraints [22], while VL-TGS combines trajec-
tory generation with VLM-based selection for mapless outdoor
navigation [23]. CoNVOI uses VLM reasoning over visually
marked navigable regions to generate context-aware reference
paths [24]. These approaches show that image-aligned spatial
representations can support navigation decisions, but they do
2


not directly study residual adaptation of a semantic trace for
different robot embodiments.
Pixel-space traces have recently become an effective repre-
sentation for evaluating and guiding VLM-based navigation.
NaviTrace defines a benchmark where a model receives an
egocentric image, an instruction, and an embodiment type,
and then outputs a 2D navigation trace in image space [25].
VAMOS uses image-space candidate paths as an interface
between a high-level planner and an embodiment-specific
affordance model, which evaluates and reranks the candi-
dates [11]. In contrast, CrossTracer does not only select from
a fixed candidate set. It treats the pixel trace as a continuous
refinement target, proposing an initial semantic trace and then
learning residual corrections in the same image plane.
C. Embodiment-Aware Navigation
Cross-embodiment navigation requires a policy to handle
heterogeneous morphologies, mobility limits, and execution
constraints. X-Nav trains expert policies over randomly gen-
erated embodiments and distills them into a transformer policy
for mobile robot navigation [26]. X-Mobility studies end-to-
end generalizable navigation through world modeling [27].
These approaches improve transfer across robot platforms, but
they mainly learn navigation behavior in action or control
spaces.
Residual learning and generative modeling are also used
to improve navigation policies under additional constraints
or transfer settings. COMPASS adapts a mobility policy to
diverse embodiments through residual reinforcement learn-
ing and then distills specialist policies into an embodiment-
conditioned policy [28]. CE-Nav decouples geometric rea-
soning and robot dynamic adaptation by training a flow-
based velocity expert from planner-generated data, followed
by a dynamics-aware refiner [29]. NavDP learns a navigation
diffusion policy with privileged simulation guidance for sim-
to-real transfer across robot platforms [19], while FlowNav
and FLUX use flow-based generative modeling for efficient
navigation policy learning [20], [30]. Unlike these methods,
which mainly adapt policies in action, velocity, or control
space, CrossTracer performs embodiment-aware adaptation
directly in pixel-space by refining a semantic trace produced
by an embodiment-agnostic VLA proposer. This design allows
semantic goal understanding to remain separate from robot-
conditioned traversability refinement.
D. Planner Supervision for Learning-Based Navigation
Classical planning methods provide interpretable geometric
constraints and remain widely used in robot navigation. Dijk-
stra and A* search for low-cost paths on discrete graphs [31],
[32], while RRT and RRT* handle continuous spaces through
sampling-based planning [33], [7]. Local planners such as
DWA, TEB, and MPC are commonly used for obstacle avoid-
ance and trajectory tracking [5], [6], [34]. Perception-aware
navigation systems further construct traversability or cost
maps from LiDAR, elevation maps, RGB-D inputs, semantic
segmentation, or learned visual traversability [22], [23], [35],
[36], [37]. EVORA models uncertainty-aware traversability
for risk-aware off-road autonomy [36], while Traversability-
Aware Legged Navigation learns robot-centric traversability
from real-world visual and proprioceptive data [37]. NeuPAN
further couples point-cloud perception with model-based opti-
mization for direct, map-free navigation in cluttered unknown
environments [38]. Although these methods improve physical
grounding and safety, they usually assume fixed robot ca-
pabilities or operate outside open-vocabulary semantic trace
generation.
Recent work uses planners, expert policies, or automatically
generated labels as scalable supervision for learning-based
navigation. CE-Nav uses planner-generated data to train a
flow-based velocity expert [29], MTG learns traversability-
aware trajectory generation [22], COMPASS uses expert
policies and policy distillation for cross-embodiment mobil-
ity [28], and VAMOS trains an affordance model to evaluate
VLM-proposed image-space paths [11]. CE-RRT* follows this
general idea of planner supervision, but targets a different
learning interface. It converts semantic segmentation into
robot-conditioned traversability cost maps and applies RRT*
to generate planner-supervised traces directly in pixel space.
These traces are then used to train CE-Adapter, enabling
CrossTracer to learn embodiment-aware residual corrections
without manually annotated traces.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
We
formulate
cross-embodiment
navigation
as
goal-
conditioned trace generation in the image plane. Given an
egocentric RGB observation, a flexible goal specification, and
a target robot embodiment, the task is to predict a sequence of
normalized 2D waypoints that describes a feasible navigation
trace for that robot. The trace is not a low-level control
command or a full 3D state trajectory. Instead, it is an
intermediate spatial representation that connects semantic goal
understanding with downstream robot execution.
A. Task Definition
Let I ∈RH×W ×3 denote the current egocentric RGB
observation, and let Ω= {1, . . . , W} × {1, . . . , H} denote
the image domain. A goal specification is denoted by G
and may contain a natural language instruction L, a target
pixel coordinate Pg = (xg, yg), or both. The target robot
embodiment is denoted by e ∈E, where E is the set of
supported embodiments.
The output is an embodiment-conditioned navigation trace
Te = {wt}N
t=1,
wt = (xt, yt) ∈[−1, 1]2.
(1)
Each waypoint wt represents an image-plane anchor point
along the intended navigation path. The normalized coordinate
range [−1, 1]2 provides a resolution-independent interface. A
waypoint can be converted to image coordinates by
ut = xt + 1
2
W,
vt = yt + 1
2
H.
(2)
Following the trace representation used by NaviTrace [25], the
model predicts a fixed-length sequence of waypoints. In our
implementation, we use N = 8.
3


Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed CrossTracer framework. CrossTracer follows a two stage design. Stage 1: Embodiment-Agnostic
Planning uses the Current Observation, Pixel Goal, and Language Prompt to produce an Initial Trace through Llama 7B and the Trace Head.
Stage 2: Embodiment-Aware Grounding incorporates Heterogeneous Embodiments through Robot Embedding and FiLM, then refines the
Initial Trace with the Trace Query and Trace Transformer. The Residual Head predicts trace residuals for obtaining the Final Trace, the
Feasibility Head predicts the Feasibility Map, and the Sensitivity Head estimates embodiment sensitivity used in the refinement objective.
The CE-RRT* Labeling Pipeline generates the Reference Trace from the Segmentation Mask and Cost Map for training supervision.
B. Embodiment-Conditioned Traversability
Different robot embodiments can induce different feasible
regions in the same observed scene. For example, a legged
robot and a wheeled robot may assign different traversal
difficulty to stairs, grass, curbs, narrow passages, or rough
terrain. We represent the target embodiment by an embedding
ze
∈RDemb, which is learned from data and used by
the refinement model to condition visual features and trace
corrections.
For
analysis
and
training
supervision,
we
define
an
embodiment-conditioned traversability cost map
Ce : Ω→R≥0,
(3)
where lower values indicate regions that are easier for em-
bodiment e to traverse, and higher values indicate unsafe or
difficult regions. This cost map encodes the physical feasibility
of image regions under the mobility profile of the target
robot. It is used to generate planner-supervised reference traces
and physical cost signals during training. At inference time,
the learned model only requires the RGB observation, goal
specification, and embodiment identity.
C. Residual Trace Refinement
We decompose the problem into semantic trace proposal and
embodiment-aware trace refinement. A vision-language trace
proposer first predicts an initial semantic trace
Tinit = fϕ(I, G),
(4)
which captures the high-level navigation intent but is not ex-
plicitly conditioned on the target embodiment. The refinement
module then predicts a residual correction conditioned on the
observation, initial trace, and embodiment:
∆Te = gθ(I, Tinit, e).
(5)
The final embodiment-conditioned trace is given by
Te = Tinit + ∆Te.
(6)
This residual formulation preserves the semantic structure of
the initial trace while allowing localized corrections for robot-
specific traversability. Excessive deviation from the semantic
proposal is discouraged through trace imitation, physical cost,
and smoothness losses during training, rather than by an
explicit hard bound.
During training, planner-generated reference traces are de-
noted by T ∗
e . They represent embodiment-conditioned traces
with low traversal cost under Ce. The learning objective is to
predict a trace Te that remains close to T ∗
e while preserving the
semantic intent encoded by Tinit. The construction of T ∗
e and
the full training objective are described in the methodology
section.
4


IV. METHODOLOGY
A. System Overview
CrossTracer is a hierarchical framework that separates goal
understanding from embodiment-aware physical grounding.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the framework uses normalized pixel-
space traces as the interface between VL-Tracer, the Vision-
Language Trace Proposer, and CE-Adapter. VL-Tracer con-
verts the visual observation and goal specification into an
initial navigation trace, while CE-Adapter adapts this trace
according to visual traversability cues and the target robot
embodiment.
Given an egocentric RGB observation I ∈RH×W ×3, a
goal specification G, and an embodiment identity e ∈E,
CrossTracer maps these inputs to an embodiment-conditioned
trace:
Te = M(I, G, e).
(7)
The mapping is implemented by two modules. VL-Tracer first
predicts an initial trace Tinit in normalized image coordinates.
CE-Adapter then takes I, Tinit, and e as input, and refines the
trace into the final embodiment-conditioned output Te.
The embodiment identity is introduced only in the refine-
ment stage. This prevents VL-Tracer from entangling goal in-
terpretation with platform-dependent traversability, and allows
CE-Adapter to focus on localized corrections for the target
robot. During training, VL-Tracer is fine-tuned on navigation
trace data through LoRA, while CE-Adapter is trained with
planner-supervised reference traces generated by CE-RRT*.
Throughout this section, we denote the initial trace by
Tinit ∈[−1, 1]N×2, the final embodiment-conditioned trace
by Te, the planner-supervised reference trace by T ∗
e , the robot
embedding by ze ∈RDemb, and the embodiment-conditioned
cost map by Ce.
B. VL-Tracer: Vision-Language Trace Proposer
VL-Tracer maps an egocentric observation and a flexible
goal specification to an initial navigation trace in normal-
ized image coordinates. We build VL-Tracer on top of the
OmniVLA architecture [4], which combines visual encoding
with multimodal language reasoning for robot navigation. In
CrossTracer, the output interface is changed from low-level
navigation actions to a fixed-length sequence of 2D waypoints:
Tinit = Fprop(I, G) = Hhead
 Hllm(Henc(I, G))

,
(8)
where Henc denotes the visual and goal encoder, Hllm denotes
the language model backbone, and Hhead denotes the trace
prediction head.
VL-Tracer supports goal inputs in three forms: a language
instruction L, a target pixel coordinate Pg = (xg, yg), or
both. Let XV
∈RMV ×D denote visual tokens extracted
from I, XL ∈RML×D denote language tokens, and XP =
MLPpose(Pg) ∈R1×D denote the projected goal-pose token.
The tokens are concatenated into a single input sequence:
Xinput = [XV ∥XL ∥XP ].
(9)
Unavailable modalities are removed by a modality mask
m ∈{0, 1}M, where M = MV + ML + 1. During training,
language and pose inputs are randomly dropped with probabil-
ity pdrop = 0.3, which improves robustness to incomplete goal
specifications. During inference, the mask is set according to
the available inputs.
VL-Tracer predicts a trace Tinit = { ˆwt}N
t=1, where each
waypoint ˆwt = (ˆxt, ˆyt) lies in [−1, 1]2. Pixel-space traces
provide an image-aligned interface between visual goal un-
derstanding and downstream embodiment-aware refinement.
They are not treated as complete 3D trajectories; instead, they
represent spatial anchors in the current egocentric view that
can be refined and executed by downstream modules.
The trace head maps the hidden states from the language
model to 2D waypoint coordinates:
ˆwt = tanh
 MLPhead(ht)

,
t = 1, . . . , N,
(10)
where ht ∈RD is the hidden state associated with the t-th
prediction token. The tanh operation constrains the output to
normalized image coordinates. Conversion to image coordi-
nates follows
ut = ˆxt + 1
2
W,
vt = ˆyt + 1
2
H.
(11)
VL-Tracer is fine-tuned through Low-Rank Adaptation
(LoRA) [39] on navigation trace data from VAMOS [11]. The
backbone weights are frozen, while the LoRA parameters and
trace prediction head are optimized. Given a reference trace
T gt = {wgt
t }N
t=1, the training objective is
LV L = 1
N
N
X
t=1
∥ˆwt−wgt
t ∥2
2+λsmooth
1
N −1
N−1
X
t=1
∥ˆwt+1−ˆwt∥2
2.
(12)
The smoothness term discourages abrupt waypoint changes in
the initial trace. We set λsmooth = 0.01 in all experiments.
C. CE-RRT*: Automated Trace Generation
CE-RRT* generates planner-supervised reference traces for
training CE-Adapter. The motivation is that manually an-
notating embodiment-specific traces is expensive, especially
when the same scene may require different paths for different
robot platforms. CE-RRT* addresses this issue by convert-
ing semantic segmentation into an embodiment-conditioned
traversability cost map, and then running RRT* in the image
plane to produce a low-cost reference trace.
Given an image I, CE-RRT* first applies Mask2Former [40]
with a ResNet-50 backbone to obtain a panoptic segmentation
mask M. Each pixel p ∈Ωis assigned a semantic label
M(p). For each embodiment e, we define a semantic cost
configuration
Ke = {Se
free, Se
soft, ρe},
(13)
where Se
free contains categories that can be traversed with
low-cost, Se
soft contains categories that are traversable but
difficult, and ρe maps soft-traversable categories to nonzero
base costs. The base cost map is defined as
Ce
base(p) =





0,
M(p) ∈Se
free,
ρe(M(p)),
M(p) ∈Se
soft,
Cobs,
otherwise.
(14)
5


Fig. 3: Automated embodiment-specific data generation with CE-
RRT*. Given an egocentric RGB observation and a target goal,
CE-RRT* first performs semantic segmentation to obtain scene-level
traversability cues. The segmentation result is then converted into an
embodiment-aware cost map according to the physical constraints of
the target robot, such as wheeled or legged locomotion. Based on this
cost map, RRT* searches for a collision-free and low-cost trace in
pixel space, producing planner-supervised embodiment-specific traces
as supervision labels for training CE-Adapter.
Here Cobs is the obstacle threshold used by the planner.
To account for clearance around obstacles, we apply Eu-
clidean distance transforms to the traversability mask. Let
Te = {p ∈Ω| M(p) ∈Se
free ∪Se
soft}
(15)
denote the traversable region for embodiment e. For p ∈Te,
we penalize proximity to non-traversable pixels:
Pe
ext(p) = λext max

0, 1 −
de
free(p)
dmax

,
(16)
where de
free(p) is the distance from p to the nearest pixel
outside Te. For p /∈Te, we assign an obstacle penalty:
Pe
int(p) = Cobs + β min

1, de
obs(p)
dint

,
(17)
where de
obs(p) is the distance from p to the nearest pixel in
Te. The final cost map is
Ce(p) =
(
Ce
base(p) + Pe
ext(p),
p ∈Te,
Pe
int(p),
p /∈Te.
(18)
The cost values are clipped to a fixed numerical range before
planning.
Given the cost map Ce, start point s, and goal point g,
CE-RRT* searches for a low-cost path in the image plane.
The complete procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. For a
discrete path P = (q1, . . . , qm), the path cost is
J(P; Ce) =
m−1
X
i=1
d(qi, qi+1) ω(qi+1),
(19)
where d(·, ·) is Euclidean distance and
ω(q) = 1 + η Ce(q)
Cmax
.
(20)
Algorithm 1 Planner-Supervised Trace Generation via CE-
RRT*
Require: Image I, goal point g, start point s, embodiment e
Ensure: Reference trace T ∗
e
1: M ←Mask2Former(I)
2: Ce ←GenerateCostMap(M, e)
3: V ←{s}, A ←∅
4: for i = 1 to Nmax do
5:
qrand ←Sample(Ω, g, pgoal)
6:
qnear ←Nearest(V, qrand)
7:
qnew ←Steer(qnear, qrand, ∆step)
8:
if CollisionFree(qnear, qnew, Ce, Cobs) then
9:
Qnear ←{q ∈V | d(q, qnew) ≤r}
10:
qbest
←
arg minq∈Qnear Cost(q)
+
d(q, qnew)ω(qnew)
11:
V ←V ∪{qnew}
12:
A ←A ∪{(qbest, qnew)}
13:
Rewire(Qnear, qnew, Ce)
14:
end if
15: end for
16: Pe ←ExtractPath(V, A, g)
17: T ∗
e ←ResampleAndNormalize(Pe, N)
18: return T ∗
e
This cost penalizes both path length and traversal through
high-cost regions.
We use RRT* [7] to minimize this cost approximately under
collision constraints. The planner samples in the H×W image
plane with goal-biased sampling probability pgoal = 0.15,
steering step ∆step = 25 pixels, search radius r = 60
pixels, and maximum iteration number Nmax = 10,000. An
edge is accepted only when all sampled points along the
segment have cost below Cobs. After a path is extracted, it
is uniformly resampled into N waypoints and normalized to
[−1, 1]2, yielding the planner-supervised reference trace T ∗
e .
The generated T ∗
e and cost map Ce are used only during
training. At inference time, CrossTracer does not require se-
mantic segmentation or a precomputed cost map; CE-Adapter
learns to infer the needed traversability cues from the RGB
observation and embodiment identity.
D. CE-Adapter: Adaptive Trace Residual Learning
CE-Adapter refines the initial trace generated by VL-Tracer
into an embodiment-conditioned trace. Given the RGB obser-
vation I, initial trace Tinit, and embodiment identity e, the
adapter predicts a residual correction ∆Te and outputs
Te = Tinit + ∆Te.
(21)
This residual formulation preserves the global structure of the
initial trace while allowing local corrections in regions where
the proposed path conflicts with the mobility constraints of the
target robot.
The visual branch starts from a pretrained ResNet back-
bone [41]. To inject robot information into visual perception,
the embodiment identity e is mapped to a learnable embedding
ze ∈RD. At each encoder stage i, a FiLM layer [42] predicts
6


Fig. 4: Architecture of CE-Adapter. The Input contains the RGB Image, Robot ID, and Initial Trace. The Multimodal Condition Encoder
first maps the Robot ID through the Embedding Layer to obtain the Robot Embedding, which modulates visual features through FiLM. The
modulated visual features pass through Tokenization and Self-Attention to form Fusion Tokens and Fusion Features. In parallel, the Initial
Trace is encoded by the Trace Projector to form the Trace Query. The Feasibility Head uses the Fusion Features and Feasibility Decoder to
predict the Feasibility Map. The Residual Head uses the Trace Decoder to predict ∆Te and refine Tinit into Te. The Sensitivity Head uses
the Robot Embedding and Sensitivity Decoder to produce the Cost Weight αe.
Fig. 5: Embodiment-conditioned feasibility prediction. Given the
same observation, different robot embodiments induce different
traversability distributions. The figure compares RGB observations,
the segmentation mask, planner-generated reference maps, and pre-
dicted Feasibility Maps for wheeled and legged robots, showing
that CE-Adapter learns embodiment-specific terrain affordances from
semantic and geometric cues.
affine modulation parameters from ze and applies them to the
intermediate feature map Fi ∈RCi×Hi×Wi:
F e
i = γi(ze) ⊙Fi + βi(ze),
(22)
where γi(ze), βi(ze) ∈RCi are broadcast over spatial di-
mensions, and ⊙denotes channel-wise multiplication. The
FiLM layers are initialized near identity, with γi initialized
around one and βi around zero, so that the adapter starts
from the pretrained visual representation and gradually learns
embodiment-conditioned feature modulation.
The final modulated feature map is flattened and projected
into visual tokens Xv ∈RL×D. The robot embedding is
prepended as a robot token, and positional embeddings are
added:
Xe
0 = [ze ∥Xv] + Epos.
(23)
A stack of Transformer blocks processes this sequence and
produces embodiment-conditioned visual tokens
Xe
vis = Transformer(Xe
0).
(24)
These tokens encode visual traversability cues under the
mobility profile represented by e.
The initial trace is then projected into trace queries:
Qtrace = MLPtrace(Tinit) + Etrace,
(25)
where Qtrace ∈RN×D and Etrace denotes learnable way-
point position embeddings. The trace queries attend to the
embodiment-conditioned visual tokens through multi-head
cross-attention:
Ztrace = CrossAttn (QtraceWQ, Xe
visWK, Xe
visWV ) . (26)
For
compact
figure
notation,
Trace
Residual
Head,
Traversability Reconstruction Head, and Embodiment Sensi-
tivity Head are shown as Residual Head, Feasibility Head,
and Sensitivity Head, respectively. The Trace Residual Head
maps the attended trace features to 2D waypoint offsets:
∆Te = δmax tanh (MLPres(Ztrace)) .
(27)
The scaling by δmax constrains the magnitude of the correc-
tion, which helps preserve the goal intent encoded in Tinit
while allowing the adapter to move waypoints away from
visually risky or difficult regions.
During training, CE-Adapter also uses two auxiliary heads.
The Traversability Reconstruction Head reconstructs the
embodiment-conditioned traversability map, represented as the
cost map Ce, from the visual tokens and skip features:
ˆCe = Decodertrav(Xe
vis, {F e
i }).
(28)
This auxiliary prediction encourages the visual branch to
encode terrain affordances that are specific to the target
embodiment.
The Embodiment Sensitivity Head predicts a nonnegative
coefficient from the robot embedding:
αe = Softplus(MLPsens(ze)).
(29)
7


TABLE I: Performance comparison on the NaviTrace benchmark.
Model
Open-
Source
↑Total Score
Bicycle
Human
Legged Robot
Wheeled Robot
Accessibility
Dynamic
Obstacle
Geometric
Terrain
Semantic
Terrain
Social
Norms
Stationary
Obstacle
Visibility
General Models
Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking
✓
-41.30
-39.92
-41.64
-45.31
-34.58
-52.25
-15.77
-45.16
-60.62
-49.55
-27.22
-47.33
Claude Sonnet-4.5
✗
7.36
6.12
8.31
7.11
7.14
2.15
11.16
6.22
-0.01
-1.91
14.83
5.86
Qwen3-VL-235B-Thinking
✓
26.24
21.86
27.31
28.38
24.12
12.21
32.20
26.82
25.17
15.45
30.82
22.63
Gemini-2.5-Pro
✗
35.67
32.15
39.32
36.46
31.07
24.23
47.90
36.80
36.01
22.91
36.79
26.39
Embodied Models
MiMo-Embodied-8B-Thinking
✓
-33.55
-25.32
-11.48
-51.80
-47.34
-153.30
-10.17
-41.26
-23.95
-71.89
-13.55
-28.00
Robobrain-2.5-8B
✓
27.96
27.67
28.23
28.99
25.87
11.41
34.30
27.87
28.31
16.60
32.52
25.74
CrossTracer-8B (Ours)
✓
45.68
42.16
46.26
46.40
46.28
33.79
52.93
45.87
45.54
37.87
46.11
52.49
CrossTracer w/o CE-Adapter
✓
22.56
23.94
22.64
22.47
21.41
-3.18
31.68
22.38
27.53
1.28
25.23
32.27
CrossTracer w/ Goal Pose
✓
63.91
60.79
64.44
64.57
64.38
53.83
71.16
63.40
61.50
63.32
63.13
64.05
Fig. 6: Category-wise performance comparison on the NaviTrace benchmark. The radar chart and line chart compare CrossTracer
with representative general-purpose and embodied models across different navigation scenarios, including accessibility, dynamic obstacles,
geometric terrain, semantic terrain, social norms, stationary obstacles, and visibility. CrossTracer achieves more balanced and consistently
stronger performance, demonstrating the effectiveness of embodiment-aware trace refinement.
The coefficient modulates the cost-based training term de-
scribed in Section IV-E, allowing the loss to weight physical
cost differently across embodiments.
E. Training Objective and Data Pipeline
The training process follows two stages. VL-Tracer is first
fine-tuned to produce initial pixel-space traces from visual
observations and goal specifications. After this stage, VL-
Tracer is frozen. CE-Adapter is then trained to refine the fixed
initial traces produced by VL-Tracer with planner-supervised
references generated by CE-RRT*. Gradients from the CE-
Adapter losses are not back-propagated into VL-Tracer. This
separation allows the first stage to learn goal-conditioned trace
generation, while the second stage focuses on embodiment-
aware residual correction.
CE-Adapter is optimized with a composite objective:
LCE = Ltrace + λtravLtrav + λcostLcost + λsmoothLsmooth.
(30)
The trace loss supervises the final output of the Trace Residual
Head. Given the refined trace Te = {we
t}N
t=1 and the planner-
supervised reference trace T ∗
e = {w∗
t }N
t=1, we define
Ltrace = 1
N
N
X
t=1
∥we
t −w∗
t ∥2
2.
(31)
The Traversability Reconstruction Head is supervised by the
embodiment-conditioned cost map Ce generated by CE-RRT*.
Let ˆCe denote the reconstructed traversability cost map and P
denote the set of image pixels. The reconstruction loss is
Ltrav =
1
|P|
X
p∈P
∥ˆCe(p) −Ce(p)∥2
2.
(32)
This term encourages the visual encoder to learn robot-
conditioned terrain affordances instead of relying only on
sparse waypoint supervision.
The cost loss penalizes refined waypoints that lie in high-
cost regions of the embodiment-conditioned map. The value
Ce(we
t) is obtained by bilinear sampling from the cost map
using normalized waypoint coordinates. The Embodiment Sen-
sitivity Head predicts αe, which weights this penalty:
Lcost = αe
1
N
N
X
t=1
Ce(we
t).
(33)
This formulation allows different embodiments to place dif-
ferent emphasis on avoiding high-cost regions during training.
The smoothness loss regularizes the refined trace with
second-order finite differences:
Lsmooth =
1
N −2
N−2
X
t=1
∥(we
t+2 −we
t+1) −(we
t+1 −we
t)∥2
2.
(34)
This term discourages abrupt direction changes and improves
the stability of the predicted trace.
For the data pipeline, VL-Tracer is trained on naviga-
tion trace data from VAMOS [11], because VAMOS pro-
vides image-space navigation path annotations that match the
8


Fig. 7: Qualitative results on the NaviTrace benchmark. The figure visualizes pixel-space navigation traces predicted by different models
across representative NaviTrace scenarios. These examples cover diverse visual conditions and navigation challenges, including sidewalks,
vegetation areas, urban roads, indoor spaces, narrow passages, obstacles, and terrain variations. Compared with baseline models, CrossTracer
generates traces that better follow the semantic navigation intent while avoiding physically infeasible regions, demonstrating the benefit of
embodiment-aware residual refinement.
pixel-space trace interface used by VL-Tracer. This makes
it suitable for learning the embodiment-agnostic semantic
trace proposal before CE-Adapter performs robot-conditioned
refinement. CE-Adapter is trained on egocentric navigation
images annotated by CE-RRT*. For each training image and
embodiment, CE-RRT* generates a planner-supervised trace
T ∗
e and an embodiment-conditioned cost map Ce. During CE-
Adapter training, Tinit is produced by VL-Tracer and then
refined by the adapter. During inference, CE-RRT*, semantic
segmentation, and cost maps are not required.
We use fixed hyperparameters across all CE-Adapter ex-
periments. Input RGB images and cost maps are resized to
64 × 64, and each trace is represented by N = 8 normalized
waypoints. CE-Adapter is trained with Adam using a learning
rate of 1 × 10−4 and a batch size of 64. The loss weights are
set to (λtrace, λtrav, λcost, λsmooth) = (1.0, 1.0, 1.0, 0.05),
where the smoothness term is assigned a smaller weight
to regularize abrupt direction changes without suppressing
necessary embodiment-conditioned corrections.
V. SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Setup
1) Benchmark. We evaluate CrossTracer on the NaviT-
race benchmark [25], which is designed to assess whether
vision-language models can generate navigation traces that are
consistent with both semantic instructions and embodiment
constraints. Each test sample provides an egocentric RGB
image, a language instruction, and an embodiment type. The
model is required to output a 2D navigation trace in pixel
space. We follow the official evaluation protocol and report
the total score as the primary metric, where a higher score
indicates better performance. We also report scores over the
benchmark categories, including bicycle, human, legged robot,
wheeled robot, accessibility, dynamic obstacle, geometric ter-
rain, semantic terrain, social norms, stationary obstacle, and
visibility.
2) Baselines. We compare CrossTracer with two groups
of models. The first group contains general-purpose vision-
language models, including Qwen3-VL-8B-Thinking, Claude
Sonnet-4.5, Qwen3-VL-235B-Thinking, and Gemini-2.5-Pro.
These models provide strong visual reasoning ability but
are not specifically trained for embodiment-aware navigation
trace generation. The second group contains embodied rea-
soning models, including MiMo-Embodied-8B-Thinking and
Robobrain-2.5-8B. To measure the contribution of the refine-
ment stage, we also report CrossTracer w/o CE-Adapter, which
removes the embodiment-aware residual refinement module
and uses the trace generated by VL-Tracer directly.
3) Implementation. VL-Tracer is fine-tuned through LoRA
on navigation trace data from VAMOS [11]. The backbone is
frozen, and only the LoRA parameters and trace prediction
head are optimized. VL-Tracer fine-tuning is conducted on
eight NVIDIA A100 GPUs and takes approximately 48 hours.
CE-Adapter is trained on 62k navigation images annotated
by CE-RRT*, using the composite objective described in
Section IV-E. Training is performed on a single NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 4090 GPU and takes approximately 3 hours.
B. NaviTrace Benchmark Results
1) Overall performance. Table I summarizes the benchmark
results. CrossTracer achieves a total score of 45.68, which is
the highest score among the evaluated models. Compared with
the strongest evaluated general-purpose baseline, Gemini-2.5-
Pro, CrossTracer improves the total score from 35.67 to 45.68,
corresponding to a relative gain of 28%. It also outperforms
the strongest evaluated embodied model, Robobrain-2.5-8B,
by 17.72 points. These results indicate that strong visual
reasoning alone is not sufficient for this benchmark, and that
explicit embodiment-aware trace refinement provides a clear
advantage.
2) Contribution of CE-Adapter. The comparison between
CrossTracer and CrossTracer w/o CE-Adapter directly mea-
9


sures the effect of the refinement stage. Removing CE-Adapter
reduces the total score from 45.68 to 22.56, a drop of 23.12
points. The improvement is especially large in categories that
require physical grounding. Accessibility increases from -3.18
to 33.79, social norms from 1.28 to 37.87, and stationary
obstacle from 25.23 to 46.11. These gains suggest that CE-
Adapter does more than smooth the initial trace; it learns
to correct trace segments that are likely to conflict with
embodiment-specific traversability constraints.
3)
Performance
across
embodiments
and
scenarios.
CrossTracer achieves consistent performance across the four
embodiment categories, with scores of 42.16 for bicycle,
46.26 for human, 46.40 for legged robot, and 46.28 for
wheeled robot. The relatively small variation indicates that
the framework does not only fit a single embodiment type.
Across scene categories, CrossTracer obtains strong results
on dynamic obstacle and visibility, with scores of 52.93 and
52.49, respectively. It also maintains stable performance on
geometric terrain and semantic terrain, reaching 45.87 and
45.54. As shown in Fig. 6, the performance profile is more
balanced than those of the evaluated general-purpose and
embodied baselines, especially in categories where physical
feasibility and scene layout strongly affect the trace.
4) Effect of goal-pose input. The goal-pose variant further
provides a target pixel coordinate in addition to the language
instruction and embodiment type. With this additional geomet-
ric signal, CrossTracer reaches a total score of 63.91, com-
pared with 45.68 under the default input setting. This variant
is not directly comparable to the language-only setting under
identical inputs, but it shows that the pixel-space interface
can effectively use precise goal location information when
available. The improvement is particularly large in semantic
terrain and social norms, where the additional target coordinate
helps reduce ambiguity in the requested navigation goal.
C. Visual Analysis of Predicted Traces
Figure 7 visualizes predicted pixel-space traces on repre-
sentative NaviTrace scenes. The examples cover sidewalks,
vegetation areas, urban roads, indoor spaces, narrow pas-
sages, obstacles, and terrain variations. Across these scenes,
CrossTracer produces traces that follow the requested naviga-
tion direction while better avoiding regions that are visually
unsafe or difficult for the target embodiment.
Compared with general-purpose vision-language models,
CrossTracer generates traces with clearer spatial structure and
fewer abrupt deviations. Compared with CrossTracer w/o CE-
Adapter, the refined traces are more consistent with local
traversability cues. In scenes containing obstacles, narrow pas-
sages, or terrain changes, CE-Adapter adjusts the initial trace
away from high-risk regions while preserving the overall goal
direction. These examples support the quantitative finding that
embodiment-aware residual refinement improves the physical
plausibility of predicted navigation traces.
VI. REAL-WORLD EXPERIMENTS
A. Deployment Protocol
We evaluate CrossTracer on two heterogeneous mobile
robot platforms, including a wheeled robot and a legged robot.
Fig. 8: Robot-side and server-side communication pipeline for
real-world deployment. The NVIDIA Jetson Orin sends camera
observations to a remote workstation for model inference, then
converts the returned navigation output into velocity commands for
robot execution.
The wheeled platform represents ground robots with limited
terrain adaptability, while the legged platform can handle
more complex surface changes and small height variations.
Both platforms are equipped with an egocentric RGB camera,
and the same visual observation interface is used during
deployment.
For each trial, CrossTracer receives the current RGB obser-
vation, the navigation instruction, and the robot embodiment
identity as input. The model outputs a pixel-space navigation
trace in the image plane. This trace is then projected to a
sequence of local navigation waypoints and executed by the
robot controller in a closed-loop. The low-level controller is
kept unchanged across methods, so the comparison focuses
on the quality of the predicted navigation trace rather than
differences in control implementation.
In our deployment, each robot is equipped with an NVIDIA
Jetson Orin, which serves as the onboard computing unit for
sensor acquisition, communication, and low-level command
execution. The CrossTracer model is deployed on a work-
station equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU. During
execution, RGB observations captured by the onboard camera
are transmitted from the robot to the workstation via WiFi.
The workstation performs model inference and sends the
predicted pixel-space navigation trace back to the onboard
Jetson Orin, where the trace is converted into local navigation
waypoints and executed by the robot controller. This setup
allows both robot platforms to share the same inference and
communication pipeline during real-world deployment.
We compare CrossTracer with OmniVLA under the same
robot platforms, navigation instructions, camera observations,
and execution protocol. Each method is evaluated from the
same start region and toward the same semantic goal. A trial
is terminated when the robot reaches the target, collides with
an obstacle, deviates from the intended route, or exceeds the
maximum execution time. This protocol allows us to assess
whether embodiment-aware trace refinement improves phys-
ical navigation performance beyond direct vision-language-
action prediction. Figure 8 illustrates the robot-side and server-
side communication pipeline used in the real-world experi-
ments.
B. Tasks and Evaluation Metrics
We design four real-world navigation tasks that cover indoor
and outdoor deployment scenarios. The indoor tasks require
10


Fig. 9: Real-world deployment examples across heterogeneous embodiments. The figure illustrates navigation traces generated for different
robot platforms in the same indoor environment. CrossTracer adapts the predicted trace according to the physical characteristics of each
embodiment, showing its potential for transferring pixel-space navigation policies across legged and wheeled robots.
Fig. 10: Real-world path comparison in physical deployment. Executed paths from CrossTracer and OmniVLA are compared against
human expert reference paths across different real-world navigation trials. Compared with OmniVLA, CrossTracer produces paths that more
closely follow the expert references and show smoother convergence near the target, suggesting that residual trace refinement improves
physical executability rather than only changing the appearance of the predicted trace.
the robot to navigate toward semantic objects in office-like
environments, including a white table and a beige sofa located
behind a pantry counter. The elevated platform task requires
the robot to reach a target sign placed on a second-level
platform, which tests whether the generated trace can account
for terrain accessibility. The outdoor task requires the robot
to follow a long-range instruction with a turning behavior
before reaching a black trash bin. These tasks jointly eval-
uate semantic goal understanding, visual route inference, and
embodiment-conditioned feasibility in physical environments.
Each task is repeated five times for each robot platform
and each method. A trial is considered successful if the robot
reaches within a predefined distance threshold of the target
without collision or manual intervention. A trial is marked as
failed if the robot collides with obstacles, deviates significantly
from the intended route, or exceeds the maximum allowed
11


execution time.
We use three metrics for evaluation: Success Rate (SR),
Success-weighted
by
Path
Length
(SPL),
and
Success-
weighted by Task Time (STT). SR measures the ratio of
successful trials:
SR = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Si,
(35)
where N is the total number of trials and Si ∈{0, 1} indicates
whether the i-th trial succeeds.
SPL evaluates both task success and path efficiency:
SPL = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Si · Lref
i
Li
,
(36)
where Li is the actual path length executed by the robot, and
Lref
i
is the reference path length. Failed trials receive an SPL
score of zero because Si = 0. In our real-world experiments,
Lref
i
is computed from the human expert path.
STT measures the temporal efficiency of successful naviga-
tion:
STT = 1
N
N
X
i=1
Si · T ref
i
Ti
,
(37)
where Ti is the actual execution time, and T ref
i
is the reference
task time. Failed trials receive an STT score of zero because
Si = 0. Under this definition, a higher STT indicates that the
robot reaches the target more reliably and completes the task
with higher temporal efficiency.
C. Physical Deployment Results
Table II reports the real-world navigation results on the
wheeled and legged robots. CrossTracer improves over Om-
niVLA on both platforms and across all three metrics. On
the wheeled robot, CrossTracer increases the average SR from
0.40 to 0.65, SPL from 0.37 to 0.59, and STT from 0.17 to
0.30. On the legged robot, CrossTracer increases the average
SR from 0.45 to 0.70, SPL from 0.31 to 0.58, and STT from
0.27 to 0.43. These results indicate that the refined pixel-space
traces lead to more reliable and efficient execution in physical
environments.
The improvement is consistent across tasks with different
navigation requirements. In indoor semantic target reaching,
CrossTracer improves the success rate for navigating to both
the white table and the beige sofa. In the elevated platform
task, the gain is more evident on the legged robot, where
the robot can better exploit its terrain adaptability when the
predicted trace guides it toward a feasible approach direction.
In the outdoor turning task, CrossTracer also improves path
efficiency and task-completion efficiency on both platforms.
These results suggest that CE-Adapter contributes not only
to obstacle avoidance, but also to selecting traces that better
match the mobility constraints of the executing robot.
Figure 9 shows representative deployment examples across
heterogeneous robot embodiments. The generated traces pre-
serve the semantic intent of the instruction while adapting to
platform-dependent traversability. For the same visual scene
and target, CrossTracer can produce different feasible traces
for wheeled and legged robots, which provides qualitative
evidence that embodiment information is used during trace
refinement.
Figure 10 compares executed paths from CrossTracer and
OmniVLA against human expert reference paths. Compared
with OmniVLA, CrossTracer produces paths that more closely
follow the expert references and show smoother convergence
near the target. This qualitative comparison is consistent with
the quantitative results in Table II, suggesting that residual
trace refinement improves physical executability rather than
only changing the appearance of the predicted trace.
VII. CONCLUSION
We presented CrossTracer, a hierarchical navigation frame-
work for embodiment-aware robot navigation with vision-
language-action models. The central idea is to decouple se-
mantic route proposal from physical feasibility refinement
through a unified pixel-space trace representation. VL-Tracer
first predicts an initial navigation trace from egocentric visual
observations and flexible goal specifications. CE-Adapter then
refines this trace by predicting embodiment-conditioned trace
residuals from visual traversability cues, robot identity, and the
initial trace. To support scalable training, CE-RRT* automati-
cally generates planner-supervised reference traces by convert-
ing panoptic segmentation into robot-conditioned traversability
cost maps and applying sampling-based planning.
Experiments on the NaviTrace benchmark show that
CrossTracer achieves a total score of 45.68, outperforming
the strongest evaluated general-purpose baseline by 28% and
improving over CrossTracer w/o CE-Adapter by 23.12 points.
The results indicate that the refinement stage is critical for
grounding semantic traces in embodiment-specific traversabil-
ity constraints. Real-world deployment on wheeled and legged
robots further shows that the refined traces improve navigation
success, path efficiency, and task-completion efficiency under
physical execution.
VIII. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Several limitations remain. The current data generation
pipeline relies on panoptic segmentation, so segmentation
errors may affect the quality of the traversability cost maps and
planner-supervised traces. The cost map configuration for each
embodiment is manually specified and may require additional
expertise when adapting to new robot platforms. Future work
will explore learning embodiment-dependent traversability
from robot interaction data, extending the representation to
3D scene structure for handling overhanging obstacles and
height discontinuities, and integrating closed-loop replanning
for dynamic environments.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Brohan, N. Brown, J. Carbajal, Y. Chebotar, J. Dabis, C. Finn,
K. Gopalakrishnan, K. Hausman, A. Herzog, J. Hsu, et al., “RT-
1: Robotics transformer for real-world control at scale,” in Robotics:
Science and Systems, 2023.
[2] B. Zitkovich, T. Yu, S. Xu, P. Xu, T. Xiao, F. Xia, J. Wu, P. Wohlhart,
S. Welker, A. Wahid, et al., “Rt-2: Vision-language-action models
transfer web knowledge to robotic control,” in Conference on Robot
Learning, 2023, pp. 2165–2183.
12


TABLE II: Real-world navigation performance of OmniVLA and CrossTracer across different robot embodiments. SR, SPL, and STT are
reported as ratios, where higher values indicate better performance.
Navigation Instruction
Method
Wheeled Robot
Legged Robot
SR↑
SPL↑
STT↑
SR↑
SPL↑
STT↑
Navigate to the white table behind the white
pantry counter.
OmniVLA
0.60
0.57
0.27
0.20
0.16
0.11
CrossTracer
0.80
0.76
0.42
0.60
0.50
0.35
Navigate to the beige sofa behind the white
pantry counter.
OmniVLA
0.20
0.17
0.06
0.40
0.31
0.23
CrossTracer
0.60
0.50
0.18
0.60
0.49
0.36
Navigate to the “Caution Wet Floor” sign on
the second-level platform.
OmniVLA
0.40
0.37
0.23
0.60
0.35
0.40
CrossTracer
0.60
0.55
0.33
0.80
0.74
0.53
Turn left at the end of the road, then navigate
to a black trash bin.
OmniVLA
0.40
0.35
0.12
0.60
0.42
0.34
CrossTracer
0.60
0.54
0.27
0.80
0.58
0.46
Average over all scenarios
OmniVLA
0.40
0.37
0.17
0.45
0.31
0.27
CrossTracer
0.65
0.59
0.30
0.70
0.58
0.43
[3] M. J. Kim, K. Pertsch, S. Karamcheti, T. Xiao, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair,
R. Rafailov, E. P. Foster, P. R. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, et al., “Openvla:
An open-source vision-language-action model,” in Conference on Robot
Learning, 2025, pp. 2679–2713.
[4] N. Hirose, C. Glossop, D. Shah, and S. Levine, “Omnivla: An
omni-modal vision-language-action model for robot navigation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2509.19480, 2025.
[5] D. Fox, W. Burgard, and S. Thrun, “The dynamic window approach
to collision avoidance,” IEEE robotics & automation magazine, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 23–33, 1997.
[6] C. R¨osmann, F. Hoffmann, and T. Bertram, “Integrated online trajec-
tory planning and optimization in distinctive topologies,” Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, vol. 88, pp. 142–153, 2017.
[7] S. Karaman and E. Frazzoli, “Sampling-based algorithms for optimal
motion planning,” The international journal of robotics research, vol. 30,
no. 7, pp. 846–894, 2011.
[8] C. Glossop, W. Chen, A. Bhorkar, D. Shah, and S. Levine, “Cast:
Counterfactual labels improve instruction following in vision-language-
action models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.13446, 2025.
[9] J. Zhang, K. Wang, S. Wang, M. Li, H. Liu, S. Wei, Z. Wang, Z. Zhang,
and H. Wang, “Uni-navid: A video-based vision-language-action model
for unifying embodied navigation tasks,” Robotics: Science and Systems,
2025.
[10] A.-C. Cheng, Y. Ji, Z. Yang, Z. Gongye, X. Zou, J. Kautz, E. Bıyık,
H. Yin, S. Liu, and X. Wang, “Navila: Legged robot vision-language-
action model for navigation,” in RSS, 2025.
[11] M. G. Castro, S. Rajagopal, D. Gorbatov, M. Schmittle, R. Baijal,
O. Zhang, R. Scalise, S. Talia, E. Romig, C. de Melo, et al., “Vamos: A
hierarchical vision-language-action model for capability-modulated and
steerable navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.20818, 2025.
[12] A. O’Neill, A. Rehman, A. Maddukuri, A. Gupta, A. Padalkar, A. Lee,
A. Pooley, A. Gupta, A. Mandlekar, A. Jain, et al., “Open x-embodiment:
Robotic learning datasets and rt-x models: Open x-embodiment collab-
oration 0,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 6892–6903.
[13] Octo Model Team, D. Ghosh, H. Walke, K. Pertsch, K. Black, O. Mees,
S. Dasari, J. Hejna, C. Xu, J. Luo, T. Kreiman, Y. Tan, L. Y. Chen,
P. Sanketi, Q. Vuong, T. Xiao, D. Sadigh, C. Finn, and S. Levine, “Octo:
An open-source generalist robot policy,” in Proceedings of Robotics:
Science and Systems, Delft, Netherlands, 2024.
[14] D. Shah, A. Sridhar, A. Bhorkar, N. Hirose, and S. Levine, “Gnm: A
general navigation model to drive any robot,” in 2023 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2023, pp.
7226–7233.
[15] D. Shah, A. Sridhar, N. Dashora, K. Stachowicz, K. Black, N. Hirose,
and S. Levine, “Vint: A foundation model for visual navigation,” in
Conference on Robot Learning, 2023, pp. 711–733.
[16] A. Sridhar, D. Shah, C. Glossop, and S. Levine, “Nomad: Goal masked
diffusion policies for navigation and exploration,” in 2024 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024,
pp. 63–70.
[17] D. Shah and S. Levine, “ViKiNG: Vision-Based Kilometer-Scale Navi-
gation with Geographic Hints,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and
Systems, New York City, NY, USA, June 2022.
[18] N. Hirose, L. Ignatova, K. Stachowicz, C. Glossop, S. Levine, and
D. Shah, “Learning to drive anywhere with model-based reannotation,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1242–1249,
2026.
[19] W. Cai, J. Peng, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, M. Wei, H. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Wang,
and J. Pang, “Navdp: Learning sim-to-real navigation diffusion policy
with privileged information guidance,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.08712,
2025.
[20] S. Gode, A. Nayak, and W. Burgard, “Flownav: Learning efficient nav-
igation policies via conditional flow matching,” in 2nd CoRL Workshop
on Learning Effective Abstractions for Planning, 2024.
[21] N. Hirose, C. Glossop, A. Sridhar, O. Mees, and S. Levine, “Lelan:
Learning a language-conditioned navigation policy from in-the-wild
video,” in Conference on Robot Learning, 2025, pp. 666–688.
[22] J. Liang, P. Gao, X. Xiao, A. J. Sathyamoorthy, M. Elnoor, M. C. Lin,
and D. Manocha, “Mtg: Mapless trajectory generator with traversability
coverage for outdoor navigation,” in 2024 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2024, pp. 2396–2402.
[23] D. Song, J. Liang, X. Xiao, and D. Manocha, “Vl-tgs: Trajectory
generation and selection using vision language models in mapless
outdoor environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
[24] A. J. Sathyamoorthy, K. Weerakoon, M. Elnoor, A. Zore, B. Ichter,
F. Xia, J. Tan, W. Yu, and D. Manocha, “Convoi: Context-aware naviga-
tion using vision language models in outdoor and indoor environments,”
in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 13 837–13 844.
[25] T. Windecker, M. Patel, M. Reuss, R. Schwarzkopf, C. Cadena, R. Li-
outikov, M. Hutter, and J. Frey, “Navitrace: Evaluating embodied nav-
igation of vision-language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.26909,
2025.
[26] H. Wang, A. H. Tan, A. Fung, and G. Nejat, “X-nav: Learning end-
to-end cross-embodiment navigation for mobile robots,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 698–705, 2025.
[27] W. Liu, H. Zhao, C. Li, J. Biswas, B. Okal, P. Goyal, Y. Chang, and
S. Pouya, “X-mobility: End-to-end generalizable navigation via world
modeling,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2025, pp. 7569–7576.
[28] W. Liu, H. Zhao, C. Li, Y. Deng, J. Biswas, S. Pouya, and Y. Chang,
“Compass: Cross-embodiment mobility policy via residual rl and skill
synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.16372, 2025.
[29] K. Yang, T. Zhang, Z. Wang, Z. Chu, X. Wu, Y. Cai, and M. Xu, “Ce-
nav: Flow-guided reinforcement refinement for cross-embodiment local
navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.23203, 2025.
[30] Z. Gong, Y. Zhong, Y. Ding, T. Hu, G. Zhao, L. Kong, R. Li, J. You, and
J. Liang, “Flux: Accelerating cross-embodiment generative navigation
policies via rectified flow and static-to-dynamic learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2603.12806, 2026.
13


[31] E. Dijkstra, “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs,”
Numerische Mathematik, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 269–271, 1959.
[32] P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the heuristic
determination of minimum cost paths,” IEEE transactions on Systems
Science and Cybernetics, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 100–107, 1968.
[33] S. LaValle, “Rapidly-exploring random trees: A new tool for path
planning,” Research Report 9811, 1998.
[34] C. E. Garcia, D. M. Prett, and M. Morari, “Model predictive control:
Theory and practice—a survey,” Automatica, vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 335–348,
1989.
[35] P. Roth, J. Nubert, F. Yang, M. Mittal, and M. Hutter, “Viplanner:
Visual semantic imperative learning for local navigation,” in 2024 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2024, pp. 5243–5249.
[36] X. Cai, S. Ancha, L. Sharma, P. R. Osteen, B. Bucher, S. Phillips,
J. Wang, M. Everett, N. Roy, and J. P. How, “Evora: Deep evidential
traversability learning for risk-aware off-road autonomy,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Robotics, vol. 40, pp. 3756–3777, 2024.
[37] H. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Zeng, L. Smith, K. Stachowicz, D. Shah, L. Yue,
Z. Song, W. Xia, S. Levine, et al., “Traversability-aware legged navi-
gation by learning from real-world visual data,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 42, pp. 400–417, 2025.
[38] R. Han, S. Wang, S. Wang, Z. Zhang, J. Chen, S. Lin, C. Li, C. Xu,
Y. C. Eldar, Q. Hao, et al., “Neupan: Direct point robot navigation with
end-to-end model-based learning,” IEEE transactions on robotics, 2025.
[39] E. J. Hu, Y. Shen, P. Wallis, Z. Allen-Zhu, Y. Li, S. Wang, L. Wang,
and W. Chen, “LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large language models,”
in International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[40] B. Cheng, I. Misra, A. G. Schwing, A. Kirillov, and R. Girdhar,
“Masked-attention mask transformer for universal image segmentation,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 1290–1299.
[41] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image
recognition,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 770–778.
[42] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. De Vries, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville, “Film:
Visual reasoning with a general conditioning layer,” in Proceedings of
the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, vol. 32, no. 1, 2018.
14
