Title: Learning Agent-based Model Predictive Control for Holistic Vehicle Performance

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.11871v1

Published Time: Fri, 11 Sep 2026 01:32:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
> AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 1

# Learning Agent-based Model Predictive Control for Holistic Vehicle Performance 

Jiaming Zhong, Reza Valiollahi Mehrizi, Mohammad Pirani, Member, IEEE, Chao Yu, Alireza Kasaiezadeh, Yash Vardhan Pant, and Amir Khajepour, Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract —Agent-based model predictive control (AMPC) has recently been proposed as a distributed scheme that collaborates with all agents to achieve optimal holistic performance. However, its optimality highly depends on the prediction accuracy that requires all agents or their contributions to be known, which is too idealistic for actual implementation. This research proposes a novel practical hybrid control scheme - learning agent-based MPC (LAMPC), combining the model-based AMPC approach and data-based learning methods to improve the holistic vehicle performance for multi-agent systems. The Gaussian process re-gression (GPR) enhanced by an online data management strategy serves as the learning core to predict unknown contributions. A novel multi-step prediction mechanism leverages the GPR learn-ing potential along the horizon. The predicted mean, representing the learned unknown contributions, completes the system model in the MPC for more accurate control. Meanwhile, a stochastic framework is formulated to guarantee control safety and fea-sibility using soft chance constraints based on the prediction variance. Both simulations and experiments show that, with the learning capability, LAMPC outperforms the traditional AMPC. LAMPC can achieve higher tracking performance in well-learned scenarios and always guarantee constraint satisfaction even in less-learned scenarios. Moreover, the proposed hybrid control scheme is efficient for real-time implementation and is flexible to any control agent topology. 

Index Terms —Holistic vehicle control, Gaussian process regres-sion (GPR), learning-based control, stochastic chance constraint. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

A. Motivation 

# HOLISTIC vehicle control (HVC) is a method for con-trolling a vehicle using any single or multiple controllers that can affect vehicle dynamics, such as differential braking, active front steering, torque vectoring, etc. In recent stud-ies, Agent-based MPC (AMPC) has shown high flexibility in adapting to various configurations and robustness against 

J. Zhong, R. V. Mehrizi, C. Yu, and A. Khajepour are with the Mechatronic Vehicle Systems (MVS) Lab, Department of Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave West, Waterloo ON, N2L3G1 Canada. M. Pirani is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Ottawa, 75 Laurier Ave East, Ottawa, ON, K1N 6N5 Canada. A. Kasaiezadeh is with General Motors Company, Warren, MI 48090 USA. Y. V. Pant is with the Control, Learning and Logic (CL2) Lab, Depart-ment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, 200 University Ave West, Waterloo ON, N2L3G1 Canada. 

units’ failure in HVC [1]. The main idea was that each control module is individually modelled as an interactive agent assigned with a local control task. Agents could be connected in a flexible plug-and-play fashion while emulating centralized MPC performance. However, the most significant limitation of AMPC is the requirement for all agents to be known, which is often too idealistic in practice. For example, when a “black-box” con-troller is developed by a third-party supplier, its algorithm and contribution are unknown if there is no specified interface. This lack of information will cause a significant prediction error in vehicle behavior, leading to unexpected control results. Thanks to increased computational capabilities in modern control systems, data-driven learning-based control techniques have gradually become possible. Notably, the learning-based MPC (LBMPC) has become one of the main trends in modern controller design [2]. This research is motivated to propose a hybrid scheme combining the data-based machine learning approaches with AMPC to solve the problem of any unknown agents existing in a multi-agent system. The learning module predicts unknown information from data, while the MPC provides an optimal solution within safety boundaries. 

B. Literature Review 

Learning-based MPC: In literature, various machine learn-ing methods could be used in control systems, for example, neural networks [3] and reinforcement learning [4]. However, the Gaussian process (GP) is the most popular learning tool in literature. Most of the existing learning patterns in GP-MPCs focus on specific tasks for fixed scenarios specific tasks. For instance, [5] proposed a LBMPC controller for an autonomous mobile robot to reduce path-tracking errors over repeated traverses along a reference path. A robust constraint learning-based nonlinear MPC (RC-LB-NMPC) was proposed in [6] to track the path of off-road terrain. Similar applications in fixed racing scenarios could also be found in [7] and [8]. However, it must be more practical when applied to diverse driving scenarios. Besides, the massive amount of driving data could be a computational disaster regarding the time complexity of GP. Existing sparse approximations [9], [10] still cannot meet the real-time requirements in HVC. 

Author accepted manuscript. This article was published in IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems , vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 17482–17492, November 2024. The version of record is available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TITS.2024.3435551. © 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. arXiv:2609.11871v1 [cs.RO] 10 Sep 2026 2 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 

Robust and stochastic MPC: The primary limitation of MPC lies in its substantial reliance on the precision of the predictive model. Explicit MPC [11], for example, can reduce the computational burden for control applications, especially for linear time-invariant (LTI) systems and piecewise linear systems. However, model uncertainties could be naturally introduced if data-driven methods were deployed to describe the system behavior. There are usually two ways to solve the MPC problem with uncertainties. The first is the robust MPC [12], which does not model the uncertainties but considers the worst case to guarantee the constraints satisfaction, resulting in conservative control actions. For instance, a minimum robust invariant set of uncertainties should be determined to shrink the constraint in tube robust MPC [13]. Due to the extensive computational cost, only a few robust MPC approaches have been applied in real-time implementation. The other approach is the stochastic MPC [14], where the uncertainties are modelled as random elements and a violation of the constraints is accepted below a given probability thresh-old. Those probabilistic constraints are often called “chance constraints” [15]. This approach is often more advantageous in that it returns less-conservative results. Some stochastic MPCs have already been applied in vehicle control [16], assisted driving [17], collision avoidance [18], and multi-vehicle network control [19]. As a probabilistic model, GPR is often combined with stochastic MPC [8]. Vehicle stability is safety-critical. It could be dangerous in less-learned scenarios with unreliable predictions. Although some solutions using the robust or stochastic MPC, as summarized above, have been proposed, balancing the constraint satisfaction and not being too conservative is challenging for HVC. In summary, challenges in accuracy, efficiency, safety, and feasibility still exist for applying GP-MPC to HVC in practice. 

C. Contributions 

This paper proposes a hybrid control scheme - learning agent-based MPC (LAMPC) for multi-agent systems. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:  

> •

A complete pipeline for this hybrid scheme was pro-vided. With the learning capability, the proposed LAMPC outperforms the traditional AMPC with higher tracking performance and can be applied to any agent topology.  

> •

We proposed a data management strategy for multi-step GPR prediction. It achieves efficient real-time GPR inference with precise predictions along the horizon.  

> •

We formulated the GP-MPC with a closed-form stochas-tic scheme to guarantee control safety. Soft chance con-straints are used based on the GPR prediction variance. The feedback assumption in uncertainty propagation and soft constraint improves the optimization feasibility. The paper is structured as follows. Section II first describes preliminary knowledge. The detailed design of the LAMPC scheme is given in Section III. Following an example in Sec-tion IV, simulation and experiment results are demonstrated in Section V. Conclusions are summarized in Section VI. II. P RELIMINARIES 

A. Agent-based MPC 

The concept of AMPC proposed in [1] adopts a two-stage approach: the first stage models vehicle behavior under net forces and moments UCG at the vehicle center of gravity (CG), and the second stage captures the actuator dynamics from control inputs Ui to UCG . In AMPC, actuators are usually clustered as agents, which partitions the index set for all actuators into Na agent subsets as SU = {S1 ∪ S1 . . . ∪ SNa }

with Si ∩ Sj = ∅ (∀i̸ = j). All agents are assumed to be fully connected through the control network. Iterations are usually required to reach an agreement if there is more than one controllable agent in the network. For each agent indexed by k, the local optimization in AMPC can be written as, 

min 

U ji,i ∈Sk

Jk =

> Np

X

> j=1



Na∥yj − yjdes ∥2RX√Na 

+ X

> i∈Sk

∥U j−1 

> i

∥2

> RUi



s.t. Xj+1  

> CG

= AdXjCG + Bd

X

> i∈Sk

U jCGi + W jk + W jCGd ,U jCGi = Adi Xji + Bdi U ji + W jdi ,yj = CX jCG ,XjCG ∈ χ, U ji ∈ Ωi, i ∈ Sk

(1) where vehicle states are denoted as XCG . At the j-th step in the horizon, observation and its desired value are denoted as 

yj and yjdes . Ad, Bd, C, and WCGd are discretized system matrices and disturbances term. RX and RUi are penalty weights for states and control inputs, respectively. χ and Ωi

are constraint polygons for vehicle states at CG and control action for the i-th actuator. W jk ≜ P  

> k′̸=k

Y jk′ denotes the sum of contributions from all other agents that agent k received, where Y jk′ ≜ Bd

P 

> i∈Sk′

U jCGi denotes the contribution by agent k′ broadcasting to others. 

B. GP Regression 

GP regression (GPR) is a popular non-parametric kernel-based machine learning tool in many engineering applications. Let Dn = ( X, y) = {(x1, y1), . . . , (xn, yn)} denotes the dateset where xi = ( xi1, . . . , x ip )T ∈ Rp is the input variables and yi = ( yi1, . . . , y iq )T ∈ Rq is the output variables. Assume 

yi = f (xi) + ϵi where ϵi are additive noises and follow independent, identically distributed Gaussian distributions with zero mean and variances σ2

> n

. GP governs the joint Gaussian distribution of outputs y and prediction f∗. The mean and the covariance function of f∗ could be expressed as, 

f ∗ =K(X∗, X)[ K(X, X) + σ2

> n

I]−1y

cov (f∗) = K(X∗, X∗)−

K(X∗, X)[ K(X, X) + σ2

> n

I]−1K(X∗, X∗)

(2) where X∗ denotes the test inputs. K(X, X′) denotes the covariance matrix whose elements k(x, x′) are kernels of pairs of data points. The basic GPR algorithm in (2) has O(n3) time zhong et al. : LEARNING AGENT-BASED MODEL PREDICTIVE CONTROL FOR HOLISTIC VEHICLE PERFORMANCE 3Offline Online                                 

> Data-based Learning Process Model-based Stochastic AMPC
> Model Selection Hyper-parameter Training Off-line Dataset Data Collection & Selection GPR Multi-step Prediction Contribution Estimation Inputs Normalization Contribution Compensation Chance Constraint Stochastic AMPC Measurements Control Command
> 𝐷௢௙௙ 𝐷௢௙௙ 𝑑 − 𝑑𝑖𝑚 𝑥 ௗ∆𝑦 ො௎஺ ே೛ 𝐷௢௙௙ 𝐷௢௡ 𝐷௦௨௕ 𝜇ீ ௉ோ ே೛ Σீ௉ோ 𝜃 𝑥 ௖௨௥௥௘௡௧ ௣
> Data Preparation Data Management GPR Learning
> Fig. 1. The overall structure of the learning agent-based model predictive control (LAMPC). Details are in Section III. The △byNp
> UA ∈RNpis the unknown contribution estimated as the output of the data point vector along the horizon from (4). The xd∈Rdis the normalized data input where dis the selected model variables based on the off-line dataset described in Section III-A. Dof f ,Don, and Dsub denote the off-line, on-line, and the selected (sub-)datasets, respectively. θis the hyper-parameters of the GP model that trained on the off-line dataset. μNp
> GP R ∈RNpand ΣGP R ∈R1are the GPR prediction mean values along the horizon and the variance, respectively.

complexity and O(n2) memory complexity, where the inverse process of the Gramian matrix [K(X, X) + σ2

> n

I]−1 is the most computational expensive part in GPR [20]. 

C. Stochastic MPC 

For a system subject to a specific constraint h(X, δ ) ≤ 0

where X ∈ RN is the system state and δ ∈ Rd is the uncertain parameter, the chance constraint can be written as, 

Pr( h(X, δ ) ≤ 0) ≥ 1 − εc (3) where εc ∈ [0 , 1] quantifies the admissible probability of con-straint violation. If uncertainty is unbounded, allowing some degree of violation is a necessary but insufficient condition for feasibility, which is also acceptable in practice. III. C ONTROLLER DESIGN 

The overall structure of the proposed LAMPC scheme is shown in Fig. 1. The learning process consists of data prepara-tion, data management, and GPR learning. The predicted mean and variance from GPR will finally be used to reconstruct the model-based stochastic AMPC.  

> •

Data preparation first pairs the outputs and inputs at the previous step as a new data point for the dataset. Unknown contributions to vehicle dynamics will be esti-mated as the outputs. Inputs are measurements or vehicle states determined by model selection methods.  

> •

Data management includes data collection and subset selection. The new paired data point will be conditionally collected into the dataset. A subset selection is required to accelerate the inference using a small number of data points from the dataset. The dataset could also be saved offline for model selection and hyper-parameter training.  

> •

GPR learning includes offline hyper-parameter training and online inference. The distributions of unknown con-tributions along the horizon will be predicted with mean values and variance.  

> •

The mean and variance of GPR predictions are used separately: The mean is used to complete the system model in MPC as an additive term to make it more accurate, as the total contribution will be compensated. Meanwhile, the soft chance constraints will be formulated based on the propagation of the prediction variance. The re-constructed AMPC will generate optimal and safety control commands for each controllable agent. 

A. Data Preparation 

Estimation of unknown contributions: The contribution of unknown agents could be estimated from vehicle dynamics, regarding less of the type or inconvenient measurement of the unknown agents. The system observation is the combined results from known and unknown agents, which provides a hint for estimating the contribution of the unknown agent as, 

△ by(t) 

> UA

= △ y(t)

> total

− △ y(t) 

> KA

(4) 

= y(t+1) − CA dC†y(t) − CW CGd − CB dU (t)

> CG KA

where, C is the observation matrix and its pseudo-inverse is denoted as C†. The “KA” represents the “known agent” while the “UA” represents the “unknown agent”. △ y(t) 

> KA

≜

CB dU (t) 

> CG KA

and △ y(t) 

> UA

≜ CB dU (t) 

> CG UA

are the sums of contributions from known and unknown agents, respectively. This estimation makes the proposed LAMPC apply to any type and number of unknown agents. 

Model selection: Model selection is used to select the most relevant input variables combinations for the dataset. Since kernel-based regression, e.g., GPR, could be regarded 4 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT (a) (b) (c)      

> New point
> Farthest point to be replaced Nearest point to be replaced
> (d)(e) (f)
> Bounding Box Bounding Sphere K-NN
> Data Collection:
> Data Selection:

𝑥 1

𝑥 2

𝑥 1

𝑥 2

𝑥 1𝑥 2

𝑦  

> Fig. 2. Data management strategies. (a)-(c) are data collection strategies: (a) Add the new point; (b) Replace the farthest point with the new point; (C) Replace the nearest point with the new point. (d)-(e) are subset selection strategies: (d) Select points in the bounding box; (e) Select points in the bounding sphere; (f) Select the nearest K neighbor points.

as a linear smoother [21], the model selection criteria used in multiple linear regression (MLR) also applies to this study. The commonly used criteria can be roughly divided into three categories: 1) predictive risk function, e.g., mean squared prediction error (PMSE); 2) coefficient of determination R2 

> adj

;3) likelihood-based information criteria: e.g., Akaike infor-mation criterion (AIC) and Bayesian information criterion (BIC). A dataset including possible input variables needs to be collected first, and then the method described above can be applied offline. The forward-selection could find the smallest subset. It will start from the minimum subset and then add variables while comparing the above criteria for each selection to find the best one. The ranges of the black-box agent’s input variables may vary significantly due to their different physical meanings and units. Therefore, data normalization is needed as a pre-process. 

B. Data Management 

Data collection: The online process of data management, mainly the data collection and selection modules, ensures the continuous learning ability and high efficiency of LAMPC. New data will be generated every moment during the con-troller’s real-time operation. Therefore, in case of processing a large amount of repetitive and worthless data, the data collec-tion module should manage the data density while preventing the data from being too aggregated or clustered. The minimum Euclidian distance is used in this study to determine whether a new data point should be added or replaced with an original point. Three strategies shown in Fig. 2 (a)-(c): 1) Add the new input point : the new point is far from the existing points in the dataset and the dataset is not full. A 2-D example is shown in Fig. 2 (a). 2) Replace the farthest point : the new point is far away from the existing points in the training dataset and the dataset is full. A 2-D example is shown in Fig. 2 (b). 3) Replace the nearest point : the new point is very close to it and their output error is significant, which means the new point brings new information that needs updating. A 2-D example is shown in Fig. 2 (c). 

Subset selection: As introduced, the inverse process of the Gramian matrix is the most computationally expensive part of GPR. This study adopts three methods for the subset of data (SoD) selection: bounding box, bounding sphere, and K-nearest neighbors (KNN). The core idea is to make the data sparse to reduce the dimension of the Gramian matrix. The schematic diagrams are shown in Fig. 2 (d)-(f). All three methods are based on Euclidian distance. The time complexity will reduce from O(n3) to O(m3) if only m ≤ n data points are selected. 

C. GPR Learning 

Hyper-parameter training: As a Bayesian paradigm, the marginal likelihood function is usually to be used to train the hyper-parameters θ in GP because it could automatically incorporate a trade-off between model fit and model complex-ity [22]. The partial derivatives w.r.t. the hyper-parameters 

θ are used for solving the optimization problems based on the gradient search method. The training process is processed offline based on an offline dataset. 

Multi-step GPR prediction: In MPC, it is not just one step forward that needs to be predicted but the entire horizon. Conventional GP-MPCs use single-step GPR prediction with some assumptions to predict all the steps along the horizon, but those methods fail to take full advantage of data-based machine-learning approaches. Therefore, some studies (e.g., in [23]) suggest a multi-step prediction method where GPR pre-dicts all steps along the horizon without artificial assumptions. However, these traditional multi-step prediction methods are essentially iterations of multiple single-step predictions. Each step’s prediction requires the previous step’s prediction value, which means the input matrix X needs to be updated at each prediction step along the horizon. Therefore, those methods are feasible but could be a computational disaster for real-time implementation, especially when the horizon is long. This study proposes a novel efficient multi-step prediction method. The main idea is, at each time step, to predict all steps along the horizon at once using a single input matrix X, as shown in Fig. 3. The key is the way of collecting the data. For example, at the current time step t with Np-step horizon, the collection of input matrix xi starts from the time step t − Np

and goes earlier. At the same time, the output data is a vector 

yi with Np elements. In this case, the input matrix X is fixed for predicting all the steps along the horizon. Thus, the inverse process of the Gram matrix only needs once at each time step. Besides, the GPR mean prediction can be calculated by simple matrix operations, where replace the vector y (m × 1) with the matrix Y (m × Np) in (2). zhong et al. : LEARNING AGENT-BASED MODEL PREDICTIVE CONTROL FOR HOLISTIC VEHICLE PERFORMANCE 5⋯ Time 

# ⋯⋯⋯

Prediction horizon 𝑁௣ 

Collected data inputs Collected data outputs Inputs of test point Predictions One data point Data set 

𝑡 ⋯ 

> Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of data collection for multi-step prediction.

D. Soft Stochastic MPC Scheme 

Contribution compensation: For each known controllable agent k, the system equation at CG can be completed using the GPR prediction results as, 

Xj+1  

> CG

=AdXjCG + Bd

X

> i∈Sk

U jCGi + W jk

+ W jCGd + XjCG, UA ,prd 

(5) where XjCG, UA ,prd ∼ N (μjGP R , ΣGP R ) denotes the predicted unknown contribution. μjGP R = f j 

> ∗

is the predicted mean value and ΣGP R = cov (f∗) is the predicted variance in (2). 

Uncertainty propagation: Since the XjCG, UA ,prd acts as an additional disturbance, the uncertainty from GPR predictions will propagate along the horizon through the system equation in (5). It is known that the uncertainty will increase along the horizon if the open-loop propagation is used, which is a risk of infeasibility if the uncertainty from GPR is significant (e.g., driving into a new scenario without previous experience.) or the horizon Np is long. Therefore, the closed-loop propagation with a linear feedback assumption is considered, which can be written for the i-th actuator in agent k as, 

U ji = vji + Ki(XjCG − zjCG ) = vji + KiejCG , i ∈ Sk

ej+1  

> CG

=



Ad + Bd

P 

> i∈Sk

Bdi Ki



ejCG + ω (6) where, vji is the nominal control action, zjCG is the nominal vehicle states, ejCG ∼ N (0 , Σje) and ω ∼ N (0 , ΣGP R )

are unbiased disturbance terms with the uncertainty of error dynamics and GPR, respectively. Ki is the feedback ma-trix. Thus, the system dynamics on vehicle states XCG =

zCG + eCG could be regarded as the combination of the noise-free nominal dynamics of zCG and the error dynamics 

eCG . By choosing feedback K to stabilize dynamics ˜Ad =

Ad +Bd

P 

> i∈Sk

(Bdi Ki), the increase of eCG along the horizon will asymptotically close to zero. The unbounded distribution ω from GPR can be turned into a bounded polygon ξGP R (εc) if manually set a confidence level (1 − εc) in the quantile function, where εc is the admissible probability of constraint violation (e.g., 2.5% ) in the chance constraint in (3). The uncertainty propagated from GPR to the error dynamics ejCG ∈ E jCG could be derived as, 

EjCG = ⊕Np

> j=1

( ˜AjdξGP R (εc)) (7) where ⊕ denotes the Minkowski sum. The uncertainty of the error dynamics will be further propagated to vehicle states and control actions. Thus, the constraints should be shrunken as, 

zjCG ∈ χ ⊖ E jCG 

vji ∈ Ωi ⊖ KiEjCG 

(8) where ⊖ denotes the Minkowski subtraction. 

Soft stochastic LAMPC: The stochastic LAMPC is now an optimization on the noise-free nominal system of vji and 

zjCG , with shrunken constrain polygons at each time step. The optimal control law for the i-th actuator in agent k should be, 

U j∗ 

> i

= vj∗ 

> i

+ Ki(XjCG − zj∗

> CG

) (9) which, in fact, is intractable to solve because the states XjCG 

in unknown in the horizon. However, in MPC context, only the first step needs to be applied as the control input, where 

U 0∗ 

> i

= v0∗ 

> i

because X0 

> CG

= z0∗

> CG

. Thus, we can still use the batch formulation to solve the optimization in real time and only apply the v0∗ 

> i

as the control action to the system. Although the feedback assumption is applied, the feasibility of the optimization is still not guaranteed. Therefore, softened chance constraints (SCC) are further considered to guarantee the optimization feasibility. Defining Ejz and Ejv,i are the slack polygons for zjCG and vji respectively, the LAMPC with soften chance constraints (SCC) can be written as, 

min 

vj−1

> i

zjCG 

Jk =

> Np

X

> j=1



Na∥yj − yjdes ∥2RX√Na 

+ ∥εjz ∥2

> Rz

+ P

> i∈Sk

∥vj−1 

> i

∥2

> RUi

+ ∥εjv,i ∥2

> Rv,i



s.t. zj+1  

> CG

= AdzjCG + Bd

P 

> i∈Sk

U jCGi + W jk

+W jCGd + μjGP R 

,U jCGi = Adi Xji + Bdi vji + W jdi ,yj = Cz jCG ,z0 

> CG

= X0

> CG

, given ,zjCG ∈ χ ⊖ E jCG ⊕ E jz ,vji ∈ Ωi ⊖ KiEjCG ⊕ E jv,i ,

0 ≤ εjz ,

0 ≤ εjv,i ,i ∈ Sk, j = 1 , . . . , N p

(10) where Rz and Rv,i are heavy penalties on slack polygons. The LAMPC in (10) will always be feasible and as safe as possible based on the probabilistic prediction results. 

Discussion of stability: Although it has been intensively studied recently, the stability of data-driven control systems is still an ongoing research field. As an uncertain system, the stability of a learning-based MPC usually consists of nominal stability and robust stability [24]. The former is defined as the asymptotic stability for the nominal control system without uncertainty, while the latter considers the bounded effect of the uncertainty on the system. For the nominal stability of a finite-horizon MPC optimization problem, the standard approach 6 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 

is to define a proper terminal cost as a control Lyapunov function (CLF) with a terminal constraint [24][25]. For robust stability, some recent works [26][27] have proposed several learning-based controllers with data selection methods to achieve robust stability. However, these approaches are based on the assumption of bounded uncertainty, which is unsuitable for the GP-MPC. Moreover, they usually adopt iterative data management methods, which is another challenge for real-time implementations. We will extend this work and continue to study hybrid data/model-based control methods that can ensure stability in the future. IV. E XAMPLE : V EHICLE STABILITY CONTROL 

A. Agent Configuration 

System matrices in (1) for vehicle stability control are, 

XCG =

"vr

#

, U CG =

" FyCG 

MzCG 

#

, W CG =

"00

#

,A =

"0 −u

0 0

#

, B =

"1/m −u

0 1/I z

#

, C =

h

0 1

i (11) where, u and v denote the longitudinal and lateral speed, respectively. r denotes the yaw rate. FyCG and MzCG denote the net forces and moments at the vehicle CG, respectively. m

and Iz denote the curb weight and yaw inertia, respectively. Four agents are considered in this example as in Table I. The Rear differential torque (RDT) is the controllable agent with the designed controller. The driver steering (STR), and the driver torque (DT) agent are the white-box agents, which are uncontrollable, but control efforts are known. The front differential torque (FDT) agent is a black-box agent with unknown contributions to vehicle behaviors.            

> TABLE I AGENT CONFIGURATION
> Type Agent Ui
> Controllable Rear differential torque (RDT) QRDT, {rl,rr }
> White-box Driver steering (STR) Fy, {f l,f r,rl,rr }
> White-box Driver torque (DT) QDT, {f l,f r,rl,rr }
> Black-box Front differential torque (FDT) QF DT, {f l,f r }

Known agents: Agent RDT is the controllable agent, and its contributions in (1) should be represented as ( k ≜ RDT ), 

YRDT = BdUCGRDT 

WRDT = BdUCGST R + BdUCGDT 

(12) where UCGRDT , UCGST R , and UCGDT denote the contribu-tion from RDT, STR, and DT agents, respectively. Mathemat-ical models of these agents are, 

UCGRDT = X

> i∈{ rl,rr }

 1

Rei 

, Twi 

Rei 

T

QRDT i 

UCGDT = P

> i∈{ f l,f r }

h sin δi 

> Rei

, Twi cos δi+ai sin δi

> Rei

iT

QDT i 

+ P

> i∈{ rl,rr }

h 1 

> Rei

, Twi 

> Rei

iT

QDT i 

UCGST R = X

> i∈{ f l,f r }

[1 , a i]T Fyi , a i ≜

(

+a, front 

−b, rear (13) where QRDT and QDT are the torques from RDT and DT agents, respectively. Fy is the lateral tire force from the estimation module. a and b are the distances from the front and rear axle to CG, respectively. Tw is the wheelbase. Re is the wheel radius. δ is the wheel steering angle. i ∈ { f l, f r, rl, rr }

represent the front-left, front-right, rear-left, and rear-right wheels, respectively. 

Unknown agent: As a ground truth for method verification, the model of the FDT agent is manually set in simulations and experiments ( QF DT f r = −QF DT f l ). A commonly used control architecture, namely a feedback control plus a feed-forward (FF) control, is adopted in this study as the control model of FDT. The feedback control is realized by a PI controller, whose input is the error between the measured and desired yaw rate ( er = rdes − rmes ). The feed-forward control is proportional to the desired yaw angular acceleration ˙rdes :

QF DT f r = KP er + KI

Z t

> 0

er (τ )dτ + KF F · ˙rdes (14) where Kp, KI , KF F are the proportional, integral, and feed-forward gains, respectively. The ground truth contribution from the black-box FDT agent UCGF DT can be summarized as, 

UCGF DT = f (rmes , U prev CGF DT , r des , r prev des ) (15) where U prev CGF DT and rprev des are the contribution and the desired yaw rate at the last time step, respectively. 

B. LAMPC Controller 

Vehicle stability control: Vehicle stability control is usually formulated to track the desired yaw rate with the limitation of the maximum side slip angle at the rear axle and the maximum yaw rate. The desired yaw rate in this example is calculated using the linear bicycle model: 

Xdes CG =

"vdes 

rdes 

#

=

 0

sign (δf ) min 



| uLb+Kus u2 δf |, μg u



(16) where Lb is the wheelbase of the vehicle. Kus is the under-steering coefficient. μ is the road friction from the estimation module. δf is the equivalent front wheel turning angle. g is the gravity acceleration. The constraints, which include the actuator limitation of RDT and stability requirements, can be written as, zhong et al. : LEARNING AGENT-BASED MODEL PREDICTIVE CONTROL FOR HOLISTIC VEHICLE PERFORMANCE 7

Ω ≜:

" I

−I

#

QRDT ≤ LL =

"Qmax − max {QDT,f r , Q DT,f l , 0}

min {QDT,f r , Q DT,f l , 0} − Qmin 

#

χ ≜: F =



1/u −b/u 

−1/u b/u 

0 10 −1

 ≤ G =



αrear,max 

αrear,max 

rmax 

rmax 



(17) where Qmax and Qmin are the maximum and minimum capacity of the wheel motor. αrear,max ≥ 0 and rmax ≥ 0

are the maximum allowable side slip angle at the rear axle and yaw rate, respectively. 

Model selection and training: The variable combination with the best statistical learning criteria is selected as the input variable for data collection. As we tested using an offline dataset, the ground-truth input set of the black-box FDT agent will always have the lowest PMSE, highest R2 

> adj

, and lowest AIC values. The model selection method used in this study can accurately identify the correct input variables in (15). The squared exponential (SE) kernel is used in this example: 

k(x, x′) = σ2 

> f

exp 

"

− 12

> d

X

> i=1

(x − x′)2

l2

> i

#

(18) where σf denotes the signal standard deviation (SD) and li

denotes the length scales of each input variable. Based on the results of model selection, d = 4 . Thus, there are six hyper-parameters in total that need to be trained, including the noise standard deviation σn in (2). 

Soft stochastic LAMPC: The uncertainty from GPR pre-diction will be propagated to each prediction step through (7). Following a common approach that the state, control input, and disturbance are approximated as jointly Gaussian distributed at each step, affine transformations of the Gaussian distribution [8] are used for the propagation in (8) from error dynamics to system states and control actions. By setting an admissible probability of constraint violation εc, the shrunken biases at prediction step j on constraints are, 

△ Gj =zp

q

F ΣjeF T

△ Qji =zp

q

KiΣjeKTi , i = RDT 

(19) where Σje is the variance of error dynamics in (7) at step j.

zp is the quantile of Gaussian distribution where p = 1 − εc.The shrunken constraints are further relaxed as soft chance constraints to guarantee the feasibility: 

Ωj ≜:

 I

−I



vj−1 

> RDT

≤ L −

"

△ QjRDT − εjv,RDT 

△ QjRDT − εjv,RDT 

#

≤ Lχj ≜: F z jCG ≤ Gj − (△ Gj − εjz )

(20) where zjCG and vj−1 

> RDT

are noise-free nominal vehicle state and control inputs. εjz ≥ 0 and εjv,RDT ≥ 0 are slack variables on state constraints and control constraints, respectively, corre-sponding to the slack polygons Ejz and Ejv,RDT .V. R EAL -TIME IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS 

Based on the above example, simulation and experimental studies were conducted to demonstrate the features of the proposed LAMPC control scheme. The controller is developed in Matlab/Simulink with parameters shown in Table II. A high-fidelity calibrated Carsim model of this vehicle from a previous experimental study [28] is adopted for simulations, with the controller running at a frequency of 20Hz. Real-time experiments were conducted on an electric vehicle with four independent-drive electric motors, with the controller running in real-time at a frequency of 50Hz on a laptop with an i7-12700H CPU and 16 GB RAM. The controller ran in Matlab Real-time Desktop model and sent the control command to motor drivers through the CAN bus at every time step.                                      

> TABLE II PLATFORM AND CONTROLLER SETTINGS
> Symbol Parameter Description Value
> NpPrediction horizon 10
> RXWeight for yaw rate tracking 5×10 6
> RURDT Control weight on RDT agent 0.3
> Rz, R vSlack weight on soft constraints 1×10 10
> Qmax Maximum capacity of the wheel motor 1760 Nm
> Qmin Minimum capacity of the wheel motor −1760 Nm
> KPProportional gain for FDT agent 100
> KIIntegral gain for FDT agent 0.1
> KF F Feed-forward gain for FDT agent 0.5
> αrear,max Maximum side slip angle at the rear axle 10 deg
> rmax Maximum yaw rate 50 deg/s
> εcAdmissible probability of violation 2.5%

The proposed method was first tested in the “less-learned” scenario, where there was not enough data with similar experi-ence for GPR prediction, to verify the safety using the stochas-tic chance constraint. Then several tests in the “well-learned” scenario were conducted to demonstrate the improvement of the proposed LAMPC compared to the conventional AMPC. 

A. Less-learned Scenario: Safety Guarantee 

Simulations: A double lane change (DLC) maneuver was operated at about 65 km/h on a high friction surface. Control agents were configured as in Table I. The dataset of the controllable RDT agent started empty, meaning there is not enough experience for this DLC. Three controllers have been applied for the RDT agent: 1) AMPC controller; 2) LAMPC controller with normal constraints (NC), i.e. the stability constraints without considering the learning uncertainties as described in (17); 3) LAMPC controller with soft chance constraints (SCC) as described in (20). The simulation results of the LAMPC with SCC are shown in Fig. 4, where the results of AMPC and LAMPC with normal constraints are also compared. It is easy to notice that when the RDT agent was controlled by AMPC or LAMPC with NC, the vehicle’s rear slip angle and yaw rate exceeded the limits. Remarkably, the absolute value of the maximum side slip angle has reached 40 deg, which is very dangerous in 8 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 

Fig. 4. Simulation results of a DLC in the less-learned scenario. (a) T=5.75 s (b) T=10.80 s 

> Optimized Trajectory Actual Trajectory Original Constraint Hard Chance Constraint Soft Chance Constraint

Fig. 5. Optimization results in the less-learned DLC at T=5.75 and T=10.80. 

reality. This violation is because the black-box FDT agent sig-nificantly impacts vehicle dynamics, but GPR cannot predict its contribution, shown as the significantly predicted error and significant variances. The RDT agent will therefore generate far more torque than is required. However, when the RDT agent was controlled by the proposed LAMPC with SCC, the rear slip angle and the yaw rate were kept within constraints, ensuring the vehicle was stable and safe. 

Details: Two typical optimization results are shown in Fig. 5. The prediction uncertainty is propagated as constraints 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 Time (s) -20 020 

> Yaw Rate Tracking Results
> AMPC LAMPC, Single-step GPR (Linear) LAMPC, Multi-step GPR LAMPC, Single-step GPR (Constant) Reference
> Measurement Prediction, Single-step GPR (Linear) Prediction, Single-step GPR (Constant) Prediction, Multi-step GPR

Fig. 6. Comparison of the yaw rate prediction and tracking performance in the last DLC in the well-learned scenario. 

shrink simultaneously on both state and control inputs. The original constraints (green solid lines) were first shrunken to hard chance constraints (blue dashed lines) and then relaxed as softened chance constraints (red dashed lines) at each step along the horizon. At time T=5.75, the state trajectory was constrained; At time T=10.80, the control input was constrained. The actual state trajectories were all guaranteed not to exceed the original constraint under the εc.

B. Well-learned Scenario: Performance Improvement 

Simulations: The second scenario investigates the control performance of the proposed LAMPC to see if the learning results are reliable enough. A detailed comparison of using different controllers in a well-learned DLC maneuver is shown in Fig. 6. The dataset already has enough data collected from similar DLCs. The predictions of the compensated overall yaw rate are first compared. The predictions using the proposed multi-step GPR (red) were significantly closer to the actual measured yaw rate than single-step GPR with assumptions (blue and green), especially when the yaw rate changes fast. With more accurate predictions, the tracking performance of the proposed LAMPC based on multi-step GPR is better than the traditional AMPC and those using the single-step GPR, especially when the yaw rate changes drastically. Besides, a comparison of the computational time consump-tion between using the single-step GPR and multi-step GPR is given in TABLE III, which is the average time consumptions counted by the Simulink built-in toolkit in the simulation shown in Fig. 6. As we can see, adopting the proposed multi-step GPR prediction only slightly increases the time consump-tion compared to single-step GPR prediction, mainly in data management and GPR prediction. However, the increase is zhong et al. : LEARNING AGENT-BASED MODEL PREDICTIVE CONTROL FOR HOLISTIC VEHICLE PERFORMANCE 9          

> TABLE III COMPARISON OF TIME CONSUMPTION OF MODULES
> Module Prediction using the single-step GPR Prediction using the proposed multi-step GPR MPC Solving 0.25 ms 0.27 ms Data Management 1.26 ms 1.44 ms GPR Inference 0.38 ms 0.46 ms Other 1.99 ms 1.90 ms
> Fig. 7. Test vehicle: the Chevrolet Equinox electric vehicle.

not significant and, therefore, will not affect the overall real-time efficiency. In addition, the overall time consumption of all modules can fully meet the real-time requirements. 

Experiments: Experiments on the real vehicle were also conducted where the LAMPC controller ran at an even higher control frequency (50 Hz). The test vehicle in this study is the Chevrolet Equinox electric vehicle as shown in Fig. 7, whose main parameters are specified in Table IV. In addition to driver-controlled drive, braking and steering, this test vehicle also enables independent differential torque control for the front and rear axles as torque can be individually controlled for all four wheels, as well as an additional active front steering input. At the same time, this vehicle also provides a wealth of sensor interfaces, including GPS, IMU, wheel speed, etc., to facilitate the provision of more accurate reference speed estimation and other key signals through sensor fusion. Several consecutive sinewave maneuvers were implemented. The learning process is shown in Fig. 8. The proposed learning scheme can accurately predict the contribution from the un-known agents. As the number of collected data kept growing, the shortest and average distance to the test point decreased in the 20-point subset. Therefore, the predictions continually became more accurate, which could be proved by decreasing                              

> TABLE IV SPECIFICATION OF THE TEST VEHICLE
> Parameter Description Value
> mVehicle mass 2272 kg
> IzVehicle inertia 4600 kg ·m2
> IwVehicle track width 1.6m
> aFront distance from axles to CG 1.42 m
> bRear distance from axles to CG 1.43 m
> ReEffective radius of wheels 0.351 m
> CαCornering stiffness of tires 130000 N/rad
> RwSteering ratio 18 .5

the prediction variance. Three similar sinewave maneuvers with different settings were also implemented for comparison, as shown in Fig. 9: (a) RDT and FDT agents were turned off, and the vehicle was only controlled by the DT and STR agents; (b) All agents are activated where FDT was the black-box agent and only a traditional AMPC controller was working on the RDT agent; (c) All agents are activated where FDT was the black-box agent and the proposed LAMPC with learning function is working on the RDT agent. It is shown that when all agents are activated, and the traditional AMPC controller controls the controllable RDT agent, the tracking performance is improved compared to the first experiment, where only the driver controls the vehicle. However, without the information of the black-box agent, there is still a significant tracking error. In the last experiment, since the proposed LAMPC controller can learn the contribution of the black-box FDT agent from data, the measured yaw rate is always closer to the reference. Quantitatively, as shown in Fig. 10, the mean-squared error (MSE) of yaw rates was reduced from 18.2 deg /s2 to 5.9 deg /s2 when the RDT agent is controlled by the LAMPC. VI. C ONCLUSION 

This study proposed a general and practical hybrid control scheme: learning agent-based MPC (LAMPC). It has been proven by simulations and experiments that the proposed LAMPC scheme has the following advantages: 1) High tracking performance . The tracking performance was significantly improved in a well-learned scenario based on reliable learning results. 2) Guaranteed safety . Stochastic chance constraint is used to guarantee the safety of constraint satisfaction. The feedback assumption in uncertainty propagation and soft constraint help to improve and ensure the optimization feasibility. 3) Real-time efficiency . This study adopts the high flexibility of GPR learning. Meanwhile, data density control and subset selection ensure data quality and GPR inference efficiency. 4) Flexibility . The proposed LAMPC retains the flexibility of AMPC for agent configuration. This method can be applied to systems containing any kind or number of black-box agents. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors would like to acknowledge the financial sup-port of Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and financial and technical support of General Motors. REFERENCES [1] C. Tang and A. Khajepour, “Agent-based model predictive controller (ampc) for flexible and efficient vehicular control,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. , vol. 70, no. 10, pp. 9877–9885, 2021. [2] K. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Xin, X. Li, C. Sun, J. Huang, and W. Kong, “A survey on learning-based model predictive control: Toward path tracking control of mobile platforms,” Appl. Sci. , vol. 12, no. 4, p. 1995, 2022. [3] S. Adhau, S. Patil, D. Ingole, and D. Sonawane, “Embedded implemen-tation of deep learning-based linear model predictive control,” in 2019 sixth Indian Control Conf. (ICC) . IEEE, 2019, pp. 200–205. [4] J. Lee, S. Ryu, T. Kim, W. Kim, and H. J. Kim, “Learning-based path tracking control of a flapping-wing micro air vehicle,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst. (IROS) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 7096–7102. 10 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 

[5] C. J. Ostafew, A. P. Schoellig, T. D. Barfoot, and J. Collier, “Learning-based nonlinear model predictive control to improve vision-based mobile robot path tracking,” Journal of Field Robotics , vol. 33, no. 1, pp. 133– 152, 2016. [6] C. J. Ostafew, A. P. Schoellig, and T. D. Barfoot, “Robust constrained learning-based nmpc enabling reliable mobile robot path tracking,” Int. J. Robot. Res. , vol. 35, no. 13, pp. 1547–1563, 2016. [7] U. Rosolia and F. Borrelli, “Learning model predictive control for iterative tasks. a data-driven control framework,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control , vol. 63, no. 7, pp. 1883–1896, 2017. [8] L. Hewing, J. Kabzan, and M. N. Zeilinger, “Cautious model predictive control using gaussian process regression,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol. , vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 2736–2743, 2019. [9] E. Snelson and Z. Ghahramani, “Sparse gaussian processes using pseudo-inputs,” Advances Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , vol. 18, 2005. [10] M. Titsias, “Variational learning of inducing variables in sparse gaussian processes,” in Artif. Intell. Statist. PMLR, 2009, pp. 567–574. [11] F. Borrelli, A. Bemporad, and M. Morari, Predictive control for linear and hybrid systems . Cambridge University Press, 2017. [12] A. Bemporad and M. Morari, “Robust model predictive control: A survey,” in Robustness in identification and control . Springer, 2007, pp. 207–226. [13] S. Riverso and G. Ferrari-Trecate, “Tube-based distributed control of linear constrained systems,” Automatica , vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 2860–2865, 2012. [14] G. C. Calafiore and L. Fagiano, “Robust model predictive control via scenario optimization,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Control , vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 219–224, 2012. [15] M. C. Campi, S. Garatti, and M. Prandini, “Scenario optimization for mpc,” Handbook of Model Predictive Control , pp. 445–463, 2019. [16] M. Bichi, G. Ripaccioli, S. Di Cairano, D. Bernardini, A. Bemporad, and I. V. Kolmanovsky, “Stochastic model predictive control with driver behavior learning for improved powertrain control,” in 49th IEEE Conf. on decision and control (CDC) . IEEE, 2010, pp. 6077–6082. [17] G. Schildbach and F. Borrelli, “Scenario model predictive control for lane change assistance on highways,” in 2015 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) . IEEE, 2015, pp. 611–616. [18] L. Gharavi, A. Dabiri, J. Verkuijlen, B. De Schutter, and S. Baldi, “Proactive emergency collision avoidance for automated driving in highway scenarios,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17381 , 2023. [19] J. Yan, Constrained model predictive control, state estimation and coordination . University of California, San Diego, 2006. [20] M. Belyaev, E. Burnaev, and Y. Kapushev, “Exact inference for gaussian process regression in case of big data with the cartesian product structure,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1403.6573 , 2014. [21] C. Rasmussen and C. Williams, “Regression. gaussian processes for 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 Time (s) -200 0200 400                   

> 020 40 60 80 100 120 Time (s) -2 02
> Estimation GPR Prediction 020 40 60 80 100 120 Time (s) 05000
> Whole Dataset Selected Subset 020 40 60 80 100 120 Time (s) 00.05 0.1

Fig. 8. Online learning process of the Sinewave experiment. 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 Time (seconds) -200 -100 0100 200 Steering (deg) 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 Time (seconds) -50 050 Yaw Rate (degps) Rerference Measurement 

(a) Only the driver (STR & DT) is controlling the vehicle (b) All agents are working, RDT is controlled by AMPC 

(c) All agents are working, RDT is controlled by LAMPC                     

> 46 48 50 52 54 56 Time (seconds) -200 -100 0100 200 Steering (deg) 46 48 50 52 54 56 Time (seconds) -50 050 Yaw Rate (degps) Rerference Measurement 18 20 22 24 26 28 Time (seconds) -200 -100 0100 200 Steering (deg) 18 20 22 24 26 28 Time (seconds) -50 050 Yaw Rate (degps) Rerference Measurement

Fig. 9. Comparison results of yaw rate tracking performance in the Sinewave experiment. zhong et al. : LEARNING AGENT-BASED MODEL PREDICTIVE CONTROL FOR HOLISTIC VEHICLE PERFORMANCE 11 

Fig. 10. Synchronized absolute yaw rate errors during Sinewave experiments. machine learning. ch. 2,” 2006. [22] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. Williams, “Model selection and adaptation of hyperparameters,” in Gaussian processes for machine learning . MIT Press, 2005, pp. 105–128. [23] S. Suradhaniwar, S. Kar, S. S. Durbha, and A. Jagarlapudi, “Time series forecasting of univariate agrometeorological data: a comparative performance evaluation via one-step and multi-step ahead forecasting strategies,” Sensors , vol. 21, no. 7, p. 2430, 2021. [24] M. Maiworm, D. Limon, J. M. Manzano, and R. Findeisen, “Stability of gaussian process learning based output feedback model predictive control,” IFAC-PapersOnLine , vol. 51, no. 20, pp. 455–461, 2018. [25] D. Q. Mayne, “Control of constrained dynamic systems,” European Journal of Control , vol. 7, no. 2-3, pp. 87–99, 2001. [26] M. Maiworm, D. Limon, and R. Findeisen, “Online learning-based model predictive control with gaussian process models and stability guarantees,” International Journal of Robust and Nonlinear Control ,vol. 31, no. 18, pp. 8785–8812, 2021. [27] A. Rose, M. Pfefferkorn, H. H. Nguyen, and R. Findeisen, “Learning a gaussian process approximation of a model predictive controller with guarantees,” in 2023 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) . IEEE, 2023, pp. 4094–4099. [28] E. Hashemi, M. Jalali, A. Khajepour, A. Kasaiezadeh, and S.-k. Chen, “Vehicle stability control: Model predictive approach and combined-slip effect,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics , vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 2789–2800, 2020. 

Jiaming Zhong (Student Member, IEEE) is cur-rently a Ph.D. candidate at the University of Water-loo Mechatronic Vehicle Systems (MVS) Lab. He was also a co-founder and the lead of planning and control of LoopX Innovation Inc. in Ontario, Canada. He received his B.S. and MASc. degrees in mechanical engineering from the Beijing Institute of Technology, China, in 2014 and 2017. He previously worked as a senior software engineer in SAIC Motor Co., Ltd. and NIO Co., Ltd. in Shanghai, China. His research interests include learning-based planning and control, multi-agent theory, and autonomous driving. 

Reza Valiollahi Mehrizi received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in statistics from the University of Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2017 and 2021, respec-tively. He is currently employed as a Data Scien-tist and a Statistical Researcher with the Mecha-tronic Vehicular System Laboratory, University of Waterloo. His research interests include building and developing predictive models using machine learning methods, deep learning object detection and semantic image segmentation, experimental designs, and survival analysis. 

Mohammad Pirani (Member, IEEE) is an assis-tant professor with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Ottawa, Canada. He was a research assistant professor in the Department of Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering at the University of Waterloo (2022–2023). He held postdoctoral researcher positions at the University of Toronto (2019–2021) and KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden (2018–2019). He received a MASc degree in electrical and computer engineering and a Ph.D. degree in Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering, both from the University of Waterloo in 2014 and 2017, respectively. His research interests include resilient and fault-tolerant control, networked control systems, and multi-agent systems. 

Chao Yu (Student Member, IEEE) is a PhD can-didate in Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering at the University of Waterloo. He is also the founder and the CEO of LoopX Innovation Inc., an autonomy and digital solution provider in Ontario, Canada. He previously worked in GM Motor China and USA. His research interests focus on machine learning-based control systems for vehicles. 

Alireza Kasaiezadeh received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in mechanical engineering from the Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 1999 and 2001, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in mechanical and mechatronics engineering from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 2012. He is currently a Staff Researcher with the GM Technical Center, General Motors Company, Warren, MI, USA, where he is involved in the area of automated driving and vehicle control. His current research interests include automated driving, vehicle dynamics, and control and optimization. 

Yash Vardhan Pant is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Waterloo. His research focuses on building robust and reliable autonomous systems, using elements of Control Theory, Formal Methods, Machine Learning and Optimization. He received a PhD in Electrical Engineering from the University of Pennsylvania in 2019, where he was a recipient of the Richard K. Dentel memorial award for research in Urban transportation. Prior to joining Waterloo in July 2021, he was a postdoctoral fellow at the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences at the University of California, Berkeley. 12 AUTHOR ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT 

Amir Khajepour (Senior Member, IEEE) is a pro-fessor of Mechanical and Mechatronics Engineering and the Director of the Mechatronic Vehicle Systems (MVS) Lab at the University of Waterloo. He held the Tier 1 Canada Research Chair in Mechatronic Vehicle Systems from 2008 to 2022 and the Senior NSERC/General Motors Industrial Research Chair in Holistic Vehicle Control from 2017 to 2022. His work has led to the training of over 150 PhD and MASc students, filing of 30 patents, publication of 600 research papers, numerous technology transfers, and the establishment of several start-up companies. He has been recognized with the Engineering Medal from Professional Engineering Ontario and is a fellow of the Engineering Institute of Canada, the American Society of Me-chanical Engineering, and the Canadian Society of Mechanical Engineering.