Title: Contingency Detection Integrated Model Predictive Control for Resilient Load Frequency Control

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.04370v1

Published Time: Thu, 06 Aug 2026 00:22:58 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
> 1

Accepted in the 58th North American Power Symposium, Houghton, Michigan 2026 (NAPS 2026) 

# Contingency Detection Integrated Model Predictive Control for Resilient Load Frequency Control 

Erfan Mehdipour Abadi, Hamid Varmazyari, Sharaf K. Magableh, Caisheng Wang, Le Yi Wang, Feng Lin 

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Wayne State University 

Detroit, MI, United States {erfan.abadi, varmazyari.h, sharaf.magableh, cwang, lywang, flin}@wayne.edu 

Abstract —Contingencies can alter power-system dynamics and introduce prediction mismatch in model predictive control (MPC)-based load frequency control (LFC). Although such events may be detected or cleared by protection systems, the correspond-ing post-contingency dynamic model may not be available to the MPC controller on the LFC time scale. This paper proposes a contingency detection-integrated MPC (CDI-MPC) framework that combines disturbance-aware contingency detection with predictive frequency regulation. Contingencies are modeled as stochastic discrete events of a stochastic hybrid system (SHS), and a disturbance-aware residual formulation is developed to jointly identify the active mode and estimate unknown disturbances. The detected mode is then used to update the MPC prediction model, reducing contingency-induced prediction mismatch under changing operating conditions. Simulation results demonstrate accurate contingency detection and substantial improvements in closed-loop LFC performance under multiple contingency scenarios and unknown disturbances. 

Index Terms —Load frequency control, stochastic hybrid sys-tems, contingency detection, model predictive control, distur-bance estimation, resilient control. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Load frequency control (LFC) is becoming increasingly important in modern power systems due to the growing integration of inverter-based resources (IBRs), electric vehicles (EVs), flexible loads, and large data-center demands [1]. Com-pared with conventional systems, these resources introduce faster dynamics, larger fluctuations, and reduced inertia, mak-ing reliable frequency regulation increasingly challenging [2]. Meanwhile, the increasing complexity of power-system opera-tion has heightened the need for detecting contingencies such as topology changes, line outages, and component failures, which alter the system dynamics [3]. Although protection systems may detect these events, the corresponding post-contingency model is typically unavailable to the LFC con-troller on the frequency-control time scale. Model predictive control (MPC) has been widely investi-gated as a promising approach for LFC because its prediction-based structure can incorporate system dynamics, operational constraints, and finite-horizon performance objectives into the control problem [4]–[6]. Robust MPC-based LFC has ad-dressed uncertainties, time-varying dynamics, communication delays, cyber attacks, and measurement integrity [7], [8], while adaptive MPC methods update prediction models using inertia estimation, Kalman-filter-based estimation, or recursive iden-tification [9]–[12]. However, these approaches either accom-modate uncertainty without identifying the active operating mode or update continuous parameters rather than the post-contingency model. Consequently, prediction mismatch after contingencies can degrade frequency-regulation performance. This work therefore aims to provide the MPC controller with online awareness of the active system-wide dynamic mode. In our previous work, contingencies were modeled as random discrete events within a stochastic hybrid system (SHS), where each contingency corresponds to a distinct 

> This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of USA under Grants ECCS-2146615, CNS-2231523, and the eCAT Center industry members.

predefined operating mode identified from measured input-output data [13], [14]. A probing-based framework was devel-oped to guarantee distinguishability among candidate modes over a short detection window [15]. However, extending this framework to closed-loop MPC-based LFC requires account-ing for both the MPC-generated control input and unknown load disturbances during detection. Unlike the disturbance-free setting in [15], load disturbances are intrinsic to LFC and must be distinguished from contingency-induced dynamics. In this paper, we develop a Contingency Detection-Integrated MPC (CDI-MPC) framework for resilient LFC under contingencies and unknown load disturbances. Contin-gencies are modeled as predefined operating modes of an SHS model, where each mode corresponds to a possible post-contingency dynamic model. Since the active mode is not assumed to be directly available to the MPC controller, contingency awareness is formulated as an online mode-identification problem. To prevent load disturbances from being misinterpreted as contingency-induced dynamics, the detection stage constructs disturbance-aware residuals by ex-plicitly accounting for the applied control and probing input and jointly detecting the actual mode and estimating the disturbance over a short detection window. The detected mode and disturbance estimate are then embedded into the MPC prediction model, enabling mode-dependent prediction updates and reducing contingency-induced prediction mismatch in the closed-loop LFC response. Main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:  

> •

A disturbance-aware extension of SHS-based contingency detection is developed for closed-loop LFC operation. The proposed detection formulation explicitly accounts for the applied control and probing input and jointly estimates the unknown initial state and load disturbance, preventing disturbance effects from being misinterpreted as contingency dynamics.  

> •

A CDI-MPC framework is proposed to incorporate the detected operating mode and disturbance estimate into the MPC prediction model. By replacing the nominal model with a mode-dependent prediction model, the proposed controller mitigates contingency-induced pre-diction mismatch and improves LFC performance under contingencies. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II formulates the MPC-based LFC problem under contingencies and characterizes the resulting prediction mis-match. Section III presents the proposed CDI-MPC frame-work, including disturbance-aware mode detection and mode-dependent MPC prediction updating. Section IV provides simulation studies to evaluate detection accuracy and closed-loop frequency regulation performance under contingencies and load disturbances. Finally, Section V concludes the paper. II. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

This section formulates the MPC-based LFC problem under contingencies. First, a nominal MPC formulation is introduced. Then, contingencies are represented as operating modes of arXiv:2608.04370v1 [eess.SY] 5 Aug 2026 2

a randomly switched linear system (RSLS) within the SHS framework. Finally, the resulting prediction mismatch under contingency conditions is characterized. 

A. MPC-Based Load Frequency Control 

The LFC dynamics considered in this work describe the fre-quency response of the system under control actions from par-ticipating resources and load disturbances. Around a nominal operating point, these dynamics are linearized and represented in the continuous-time state-space form 

˙x(t) = Ac

> 0

x(t) + Bc

> 0

u(t) + Ec

> 0

w(t), (1) 

y(t) = C0x(t),

where x(t) is the system state vector, u(t) is the LFC control input, w(t) denotes the load disturbance, and y(t)

is the measured frequency-related output, such as frequency deviation or area control error. The subscript 0 denotes the nominal operating condition, while the superscript c indicates the continuous-time representation of the system matrices. For MPC implementation, (1) is discretized with sampling time Ts using a zero-order hold, yielding 

x(k + 1) = A0x(k) + B0u(k) + E0w(k), (2) 

y(k) = C0x(k),

where A0, B0, and E0 are the nominal discrete-time matrices obtained from the discretization. Over a prediction horizon N , define the stacked state trajectory as 

Xjk =



x(k + 1) 

x(k + 2) 

...

x(k + N )

 . (3) Similarly, U jk and W jk denote the stacked input and disturbance sequences associated with the jth operating mode, whose discrete-time state-space matrices are denoted by (Aj , B j , E j ).For the jth operating mode, the lifted prediction model assumes that the operating mode remains unchanged over the prediction horizon, since future mode transitions are unknown to the MPC controller. Accordingly, the lifted prediction model is given by 

Xjk = Φ j x(k) + Γ j U jk + Ω j W jk , (4) where Xjk denotes the state trajectory predicted using 

(Aj , B j , E j ), and 

Φj ≜



A1

> j

A2

> j

...

ANj

 , Γj ≜



Bj 0 · · · 0

Aj Bj Bj · · · 0

... ... . . . ...

AN −1 

> j

Bj AN −2 

> j

Bj · · · Bj

 ,

(5) and 

Ωj ≜



Ej 0 · · · 0

Aj Ej Ej · · · 0

... ... . . . ...

AN −1 

> j

Ej AN −2 

> j

Ej · · · Ej

 . (6) For the nominal LFC model, the lifted matrices are obtained by using A0, B0, and E0 in (5)–(6). Since the future load disturbance is not available to the nominal controller, the nominal MPC prediction is constructed assuming W 0 

> k

= 0.Accordingly, the disturbance-free nominal prediction is given by ¯X0 

> k

= Φ 0x(k) + Γ 0U 0 

> k

, (7) where ¯X0 

> k

denotes the state trajectory predicted by the nominal model in the absence of disturbance forecasting. Following standard MPC-based LFC formulations [6], [7], the nominal controller computes the input sequence by solving a finite-horizon quadratic programming problem that penalizes predicted state deviations from the nominal operating point and control effort. Using the disturbance-free nominal predic-tion in (7), the nominal MPC problem is formulated as 

min 

> Uk

J0(k) = ( ¯X0 

> k

)T ¯Q ¯X0 

> k

+ U Tk ¯RU k (8a) s.t. ¯X0 

> k

= Φ 0x(k) + Γ 0Uk, (8b) 

Umin ≤ Uk ≤ Umax , (8c) 

Xmin ≤ ¯X0 

> k

≤ Xmax . (8d) Here, ¯Q ⪰ 0 and ¯R ≻ 0 are the horizon state- and input-weighting matrices, respectively, where ¯Q is positive semi-definite and ¯R is positive definite. The matrix ¯Q determines the relative importance of frequency regulation performance, while ¯R penalizes aggressive control actions and reflects the desired use of participating regulation resources. Constraint (8b) enforces the nominal lifted prediction model, (8c) repre-sents input limitations such as resource capacity and actuation bounds, and (8d) imposes admissible bounds on the predicted state trajectory, including frequency-security requirements. Af-ter solving (8), the first element of the optimal input sequence is applied to the system, and the optimization is repeated at the next sampling instant using updated measurements; however, this baseline formulation relies on the nominal prediction model and does not account for contingencies in the active system dynamics. 

B. Contingencies as RSLS Modes 

Following the RSLS modeling framework in [13]–[15], contingencies are represented as random discrete events that change the active state-space model of the system. This repre-sentation is particularly suitable for LFC because the system is linearized around each operating condition. Consequently, the nominal operating condition and each contingency scenario are represented by distinct linear subsystems, with each subsystem corresponding to a unique operating mode of the SHS. When a contingency occurs, the system transitions from the current operating mode to the corresponding post-contingency mode, resulting in a switch between the associated linear state-space models. In the LFC setting considered here, a contingency refers to an unobserved change in the dynamic model that affects the frequency response before the event is explicitly identified by the operator or controller. Let αk ∈ S = {0, 1, . . . , M } denote the active operating mode at time k, where αk = 0 corresponds to the nominal condition and αk = i, i = 1 , . . . , M , corresponds to the 

ith predefined contingency mode. The contingency-dependent dynamics are represented as 

x(k + 1) = Aαk x(k) + Bαk u(k) + Eαk w(k),y(k) = Cαk x(k). (9) For a fixed mode αk = i, the system evolves according to the linear subsystem (Ai, B i, E i, C i). Thus, contingencies are modeled as switches among a finite set of candidate dynamic modes. The mode set, S is assumed to be known, while the switching sequence αk and the switching time are not directly available to the controller, and must be inferred from measured input-output data over the detection window. The candidate mode set S is constructed offline from the planning stage of contingency studies, in which credible and operationally significant contingencies are identified and represented by their corresponding linearized models. Accordingly, each can-didate mode corresponds to a predefined contingency scenario. This work assumes that the relevant operating contingencies are represented in S. Extending the proposed framework to broader contingency classes or clustered contingency models is left for future work. 3

C. Prediction Mismatch under Contingencies 

The nominal MPC problem in (8) is solved using the disturbance-free nominal prediction ¯X0 

> k

in (7). If the system remains in the nominal mode, the actual lifted state trajectory over the horizon is 

X0 

> k

= Φ 0x(k) + Γ 0Uk + Ω 0Wk. (10) Therefore, the prediction error under the nominal model is 

∆X0 

> k

≜ X0 

> k

− ¯X0 

> k

= Ω 0Wk. (11) This term represents the effect of the load disturbance, which is the standard regulation task addressed by LFC through receding-horizon feedback. In contrast, when a contingency i̸ = 0 occurs, the actual state trajectory for the active mode i over the prediction horizon is Xik = Φ ix(k) + Γ iUk + Ω iWk, (12) where (Φ i, Γi, Ωi) are constructed from (Ai, B i, E i) using (5)–(6). The prediction mismatch between the active contin-gency model and the disturbance-free nominal model used by MPC is then 

∆Xi|0 

> k

≜ Xik − ¯X0

> k

= (Φ i − Φ0)x(k) + (Γ i − Γ0)Uk + Ω iWk. (13) Unlike (11), the mismatch in (13) contains not only the effect of load disturbance, but also the mismatch between the nominal and active mode-dependent state and input prediction operators. Hence, even in the absence of load disturbance, an unidentified contingency can produce a nonzero prediction mismatch if (Φ i, Γi)̸ = (Φ 0, Γ0).As a result, the equality constraint in (8b) and the state trajectory penalized in (8a) may no longer represent the actual system evolution. Therefore, maintaining accurate predictive regulation requires identifying the active operating mode and adapting the MPC prediction model accordingly. Moreover, since the active mode is unknown to the controller, the initial condition associated with each candidate model cannot be assumed known during detection. This additional uncertainty, together with the unknown load disturbance, motivates the disturbance-aware contingency detection and prediction-model updating framework developed in the next section. III. C ONTINGENCY DETECTION -I NTEGRATED MPC This section presents the proposed CDI-MPC framework. Building on the probing-based RSLS detection framework, it extends closed-loop LFC by accounting for the applied control input and unknown load disturbance during mode identification. The detected mode and disturbance estimate are then incorporated into the MPC prediction model. 

A. RSLS-Based Detection Framework Preliminaries 

The RSLS-based detection framework adopted from [13], [15] operates in a time-division structure. In this paper, this structure is embedded into a closed-loop MPC-based LFC by partitioning the closed-loop operation into repeated update intervals. Let L denote the number of samples in each update interval and let kℓ = ℓL denote the starting instant of the 

ℓth interval. The first Nd samples, with Nd ≪ L, form the detection window 

Dℓ = {kℓ, . . . , k ℓ + Nd − 1}. (14) During this window, the LFC control input remains active while a probing signal is superimposed on the input to identify the active mode dynamics. This probing signal is adopted from the input-design procedure in [15], which is used to guarantee distinguishability among candidate RSLS modes when passive measurements alone are insufficient due to similarities in the behaviors of different contingencies. At the end of Dℓ, the data collected over the detection window are used to identify the active mode. The remaining samples of the same update interval form the regulation phase 

Rℓ = {kℓ + Nd, . . . , k ℓ + L − 1}. (15) During Rℓ, the probing signal is removed, and the MPC con-troller performs frequency regulation using the most recently updated prediction model. Accordingly, the applied input during the detection window is u(k) = uc(k) + up(k), k ∈ D ℓ, (16) where uc(k) is the LFC control input generated by MPC and up(k) is the probing signal. During the regulation phase, 

up(k) = 0 .The choice of L and Nd creates a delay-performance tradeoff. Since contingencies are unknown, events that arise during the regulation phase are detected only at the next update instant. Therefore, reducing L decreases the maximum detection delay and enables faster controller adaptation, but increases the probing duty ratio Nd/L , resulting in more frequent probing injections and potentially larger temporary frequency deviations. On the other hand, the minimum re-quired value of Nd can be selected according to the theoretical result in [15], which guarantees distinguishability among the candidate operating modes. Increasing Nd generally improves estimation accuracy by incorporating more measurements, but also delays the controller update following a contingency. Consequently, L and Nd should be selected jointly to balance detection speed, estimation accuracy, and closed-loop LFC performance. During the detection window, Dℓ, the measured output sequence is collected as 

Yℓ =



y(kℓ + 1) 

y(kℓ + 2) 

...

y(kℓ + Nd)

 . (17) The probing-based RSLS detection principle in [13], [15] compares this measured response, Yℓ, with the responses reconstructed from the candidate modes. Let bYℓ,i denote the output sequence reconstructed over Dℓ under candidate mode 

i ∈ S . The mode-dependent residual is then defined as 

ri(ℓ) = Yℓ − bYℓ,i  

> 22

, ∀i ∈ S , (18) and the active mode is detected by the minimum residual 

ˆαℓ = arg min  

> i∈S

ri(ℓ). (19) However, in the probing-based detection setting used in [13], [15], the residual in (18) is constructed for an open-loop, disturbance-free system response, where the probing signal is the main known input used for mode detection, and the initial condition is the only unknown parameter. By contrast, in the closed-loop LFC setting considered here, the measured response over Dℓ is affected by both the MPC regulation input and the probing signal, as well as the unknown load distur-bances. Moreover, the initial condition associated with each candidate mode is also unknown during detection. Therefore, the main task is to construct bYℓ,i by explicitly accounting for the known applied input while jointly estimating the candidate initial condition and load disturbance. This disturbance-aware reconstruction is developed next. 

B. Disturbance-Aware Contingency Detection 

During the detection window Dℓ, the measured output sequence Yℓ is defined in (17), and let Uℓ denote the stacked applied input sequence over the same window. Since Dℓ is 4

short, the load disturbance is approximated as constant over the detection window, 

w(k) ≈ dℓ, k ∈ D ℓ, (20) where dℓ is the unknown constant disturbance over the detec-tion window. For each possible mode i ∈ S , the lifted prediction model in (4) is applied over the detection horizon Nd using the corresponding state-space matrices (Ai, B i, E i). Thus, the candidate state trajectory over Dℓ is written as 

Xiℓ = Φ ix(kℓ) + Γ iUℓ + Ω iWℓ. (21) where Φi, Γi, and Ωi are obtained from (5) and (6) by setting the horizon length to Nd. Under the constant-disturbance approximation in (20), the disturbance sequence is given by 

Wℓ = 1Nd ⊗ dℓ .Let Ci ≜ INd ⊗ Ci. Since the applied input sequence Uℓ is known, its contribution to the measured output can be removed for each candidate mode. The net output is computed as 

Y net  

> ℓ,i

= Yℓ − C iΓiUℓ. (22) After the known input contribution is removed, the re-maining output response is attributed to the unknown initial condition and the unknown load disturbance. Using (21) and the constant-disturbance approximation in (20), the net output can be written as 

Y net  

> ℓ,i

= Λ iθℓ + ηℓ, (23) where ηℓ denotes measurement noise, 

θℓ =

x(kℓ)

dℓ



, Λi = Ci [Φ i Ωi] . (24) For each candidate mode i ∈ S, the unknown initial condition and constant disturbance are estimated by fitting the net output response in (22). Specifically, 

ˆθℓ,i = arg min  

> θ

Y net  

> ℓ,i

− Λiθ 22 , (25) where θ has the same structure as θℓ in (24). Assuming that 

Λi has full column rank, the least-squares solution is 

ˆθℓ,i = (Λ Ti Λi)−1ΛTi Y net  

> ℓ,i

. (26) If the full column rank condition is not satisfied, the observable-subspace decomposition proposed in [15] can be employed to perform the estimation using only the observable component of the system. Accordingly, the generic residual in (18) is evaluated in a disturbance-aware form as 

ri(ℓ) = Y net  

> ℓ,i

− Λi ˆθℓ,i 

> 22

. (27) Thus, the detected contingency mode is obtained by (19) and the associated disturbance is estimated as 

ˆdℓ = [0 I] ˆθℓ, ˆαℓ . (28) These detections and estimation results are used to update the MPC prediction model during the regulation interval Rℓ. Thus, the controller replaces the nominal prediction model with the model associated with the detected mode, and incorporates the estimated disturbance, reducing the prediction mismatch caused by contingencies and load variations. 

C. CDI-MPC Formulation and Implementation 

After contingency detection ˆαℓ and load disturbance esti-mation ˆdℓ, these parameters are used to update the prediction model in the MPC problem. During the regulation phase Rℓ,

Algorithm 1 Online CDI-MPC Implementation  

> 1:

Initialize ˆα = 0 and ˆd = 0 . 

> 2:

for k = 0 , 1, . . . do  

> 3:

Set kL = mod( k, L ). 

> 4:

if kL = Nd then  

> 5:

Detect the contingency mode and estimate the load disturbance using (25)-(28).  

> 6:

Update ˆα and ˆd. 

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

Solve (29) using the current ˆα and ˆd. 

> 9:

if kL < N d then  

> 10:

Apply u(k) = uc(k) + up(k) and collect input-output data.  

> 11:

else  

> 12:

Apply u(k) = uc(k). 

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end for 

the CDI-MPC problem is formulated as 

min 

> Uk

JC (k) = ( ˆX ˆαℓ 

> k

)T ¯Q ˆX ˆαℓ 

> k

+ U Tk ¯RU k (29a) s.t. ˆX ˆαℓ 

> k

= Φ ˆαℓ x(k) + Γ ˆαℓ Uk + Ω ˆαℓ Wℓ, (29b) 

Umin ≤ Uk ≤ Umax , (29c) 

Xmin ≤ ˆX ˆαℓ 

> k

≤ Xmax . (29d) In (29), ˆX ˆαℓ 

> k

is the predicted state trajectory generated by the detected contingency mode over the MPC horizon. It is obtained from the lifted model in (4) by setting j = ˆ αℓ and using the estimated disturbance ˆdℓ. Therefore, the objective in (29a) penalizes the updated predicted state trajectory and control effort, while the constraint in (29d) imposes the state and frequency limits on the same updated prediction. Compared with the nominal MPC problem in (8), the CDI-MPC problem replaces the nominal prediction model with the detected mode model and incorporates the estimated load disturbance. Algorithm 1 summarizes the online implementation of the proposed CDI-MPC framework. The computational burden is limited because the candidate mode models, lifted prediction matrices, regression matrices, and probing-input design are computed offline. During operation, the detector is executed only once per update interval, jointly estimating the load disturbance and identifying the active mode by evaluating short-window residuals over the candidate modes. The MPC quadratic program is then solved at each sampling instant using the detected mode. Therefore, compared with nominal MPC, the additional computational cost of CDI-MPC is pri-marily the intermittent residual-based mode-detection step. IV. C ASE STUDY 

The proposed CDI-MPC framework is evaluated using the 5-bus transmission network shown in Fig. 1. The network in-cludes two generator buses, Buses 1 and 2, which are modeled as dynamic states of a reduced-order LFC system based on synchronous-generator swing equations. The remaining buses represent non-dynamic load buses whose influence on system dynamics is captured through algebraic network equations. The reduced-order LFC model is described by the state vector 

x = [ δ1, ω 1, δ 2, ω 2]T , control input u = [ u1, u 2]T , and load disturbance input w = [ w1, w 2]T . Here, u1 and u2 denote the reference power commands applied to the generating units at Buses 1 and 2, respectively, while w1 and w2 represent the load disturbances acting at the corresponding buses. In 5PMU 

> PMU

Fig. 1: IEEE 5-bus system. the net output model of (23), the additive noise term ηℓ

is modeled as zero-mean Gaussian noise. The frequency-and rotor-angle measurement noise standard deviations are chosen as σf = 10 −4 Hz and σδ = 10 −4 rad , respectively. In general, reliable classification requires the noise-induced residual perturbation to remain sufficiently small relative to the residual margin between the actual mode and the near-est competing mode. Under higher measurement-noise levels or larger parameter uncertainties, increased probing energy, longer detection windows, or adaptive state and disturbance estimation may be required; their systematic design is left for future work. The system parameters and the system state-space model are introduced in [13]. Contingencies are modeled through variations in the impedance of transmission line 1–3. Four candidate operating conditions are considered and are represented by four operat-ing modes: Mode 0 for nominal operation with Z13 = 0 .06 

p.u., Mode 1 for mild line damage with Z13 = 0 .10 p.u., Mode 2 for severe line damage with Z13 = 0.60 p.u., and Mode 3 for line outage with Z13 = 1000 p.u. These operating conditions define the RSLS mode set used by the detector and the CDI-MPC controller. The simulation horizon is Tsim = 120 s with sampling period Ts = 0.1 s. The contingency detection module is executed every L = 10 s. Within each update interval, the first 0.3 s, corresponding to three measurement samples, is used as the detection interval 

Dℓ, and the remaining 9.7 s forms the regulation interval Rℓ.The short detection interval demonstrates that the proposed disturbance-aware RSLS detector can identify the active oper-ating mode and estimate the unknown disturbances using only a small amount of measurement data, thereby minimizing the time spent in detection and maximizing the time available for optimal LFC. The MPC prediction and control horizons are selected as 

Np = Nc = 30 , corresponding to a 3 s prediction horizon. The state and input weighting matrices are chosen as 

Q = diag(10 , 1000 , 10 , 1000) , R = 10 −1I2.

The larger weights assigned to the frequency states reflect the primary objective of LFC, namely, minimizing frequency deviations at the two generator buses, while the smaller weights on the rotor-angle states provide mild damping of angle deviations. The input penalty matrix is selected to prevent excessive control effort while maintaining effective frequency regulation performance. The control inputs are constrained by 

−0.25 ≤ u1 ≤ 0.25 , −0.15 ≤ u2 ≤ 0.15 ,

and the frequency deviations are limited to ±0.5 Hz. This bound is imposed as a conservative transient security con-straint rather than a steady-state frequency-regulation require-ment, consistent with commonly adopted LFC operating prac-tices [16]. In the reported simulations, the resulting frequency deviations remain substantially below this bound. During the detection interval, a sinusoidal probing signal 

up(t) = Ap sin( ωpt)0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0.004 0.006 0.008 0.01       

> Disturbance (a)
> 020 40 60 80 100 120
> Time (s)
> 0.001 0.002 0.003 0.004
> Disturbance (b)

Fig. 2: Actual load disturbances, w, and estimated disturbance, 

ˆd values for (a) Load 1 and (b) Load 2. 10 30 50 70 90 110 

> Time (s)
> 0123
> Mode (  k)
> True Mode Detected/Controller Mode

Fig. 3: Actual operating mode and detected controller mode under the proposed CDI-MPC framework. is injected through the first control channel, u1, where Ap =0.02 and ωp = 2 π(0 .8) rad/s. The probing signal is designed according to the contingency-identification criteria proposed in [15]. Since the probing amplitude is small relative to the admissible control range, it provides sufficient excitation for mode identification while introducing only a limited and temporary impact on frequency regulation performance. Time-varying load disturbances are applied to both load buses, as shown in Fig. 2. Since the load profile varies slowly compared to the detection interval duration, the disturbance is assumed constant within each detection interval and is applied to the CDI-MPC framework during the subsequent regulation phase. Accordingly, the detector computes piecewise-constant estimates of the load disturbances, denoted by ˆd1 and ˆd2 for Loads 1 and 2, respectively, which closely track the underlying disturbance profiles. To evaluate the mode-identification performance of the pro-posed disturbance-aware RSLS detector, Fig. 3 compares the detected controller mode with the actual system mode. Since the contingency events are introduced at arbitrary instants and are not synchronized with the detection-update schedule, transitions occurring during a regulation interval are detected at the next detection interval. This explains the short delays observed between the actual and detected mode transitions in Fig. 3. The detection accuracy is defined as the percentage of scheduled detection updates for which the detected operating mode matches the true operating mode. Under this definition, the detector achieves a detection accuracy of 100% over the 12 detection updates performed during the 120-s simulation, which include seven operating-mode transitions. Since mode estimation is performed only at the scheduled detection-update instants, the short delay between a contingency occurrence and the subsequent detection update is not counted as a misclassification. Instead, its effect is reflected in the closed-loop frequency-regulation performance metrics presented next. Having established the effectiveness of the proposed disturbance-aware mode-detection framework, we next eval-uate its impact on closed-loop LFC performance. Fig. 4 com-pares three control strategies: baseline MPC, perfect mode-aware MPC, and the proposed CDI-MPC. The baseline MPC 60 20 40 60 80 100 120 -4 -2 02468        

> f1 (Hz)
> 10 -4 (a)
> Baseline MPC Perfect mode-aware MPC CDI-MPC
> 020 40 60 80 100 120
> Time (s)
> -1.5 -1 -0.5 00.5 1
> f2 (Hz)
> 10 -3 (b)
> Baseline MPC Perfect mode-aware MPC CDI-MPC

Fig. 4: Frequency deviations of (a) Generator 1 and (b) Generator 2 under baseline MPC, perfect mode-aware MPC, and the proposed CDI-MPC framework. TABLE I: Frequency-regulation performance comparison. 

Metric Baseline Perfect CDI-MPC Improvement (%) IAE ( ∆f1) 0.0117 2.18 × 10 −5 0.0019 83.5 IAE ( ∆f2) 0.0141 2.09 × 10 −5 0.0025 81.9 ITAE ( ∆f1) 0.949 0.0013 0.113 88.1 ITAE ( ∆f2) 1.131 0.0013 0.156 86.2 

uses a fixed nominal prediction model, whereas the perfect mode-aware MPC assumes knowledge of the true operating mode and serves as an ideal benchmark. CDI-MPC updates its prediction model using the detected mode. Figs. 4(a) and 4(b) compare the frequency deviations of Generators 1 and 2, respectively. All three controllers regulate the load variations and maintain the frequency within the admissible range. Following contingency-induced mode tran-sitions, the baseline MPC exhibits larger frequency excursions because its nominal prediction model no longer matches the system dynamics. In contrast, the perfect mode-aware MPC continuously uses the correct model and is therefore much less affected. The CDI-MPC response reflects two competing ef-fects: mode-dependent prediction updates reduce contingency-induced prediction mismatch, whereas probing introduces small temporary deviations, primarily in Generator 1 because the probing input is applied through the first control channel. To quantify the temporary impact of the probing signal on frequency-regulation performance, a contingency-free sim-ulation was performed over the interval 0–10 s with and without probing. The frequency-regulation performance is evaluated using the Integral Absolute Error (IAE) and Integral Time-weighted Absolute Error (ITAE), which measure the total magnitude and persistence of frequency deviations, re-spectively. The maximum probe-induced frequency deviations were 1.39 × 10 −4 Hz and 7.63 × 10 −6 Hz for generators 1 and 2, respectively. Over the same interval, the IAE of generator 1 increased from 2.79 × 10 −4 to 3.00 × 10 −4,while the corresponding ITAE increased from 1.32 × 10 −3

to 1.36 × 10 −3. These results confirm that the probing signal introduces only a small temporary degradation in frequency-regulation performance while providing the excitation required for reliable mode identification. Table I quantifies the over-all frequency-regulation performance of the three controllers using the IAE and ITAE. CDI-MPC reduces the IAE and ITAE by approximately 84% and 88% for ∆f1, and by approximately 82% and 86% for ∆f2. These results show that the performance gain obtained from contingency identification and model updating outweighs the temporary probing effect. As expected, the perfect mode-aware MPC gives the best performance because it directly uses the true operating mode. Nevertheless, CDI-MPC remains much closer to this ideal benchmark than to the baseline MPC, demonstrating that the proposed framework can recover the operating-mode informa-tion needed for adaptive MPC-based LFC without direct access to the true contingency mode. V. C ONCLUSION 

This paper proposed a Contingency Detection-Integrated MPC (CDI-MPC) framework for resilient load frequency control under contingencies and unknown load disturbances. A disturbance-aware residual formulation was developed to jointly identify the active operating mode and estimate the load disturbance, and the resulting estimates were incorporated into the MPC prediction model to mitigate contingency-induced prediction mismatch. Simulation results demonstrated accurate mode identifica-tion and significant improvements in closed-loop frequency-regulation performance over nominal MPC, with performance approaching the ideal mode-aware benchmark. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of integrating contingency de-tection with predictive control for resilient LFC. REFERENCES [1] S. Masikana, G. Sharma, and S. Sharma, “Renewable energy sources integrated load frequency control of power system: A review,” e-Prime - Advances in Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Energy , vol. 8, p. 100605, 2024. [2] C. He, H. Geng, K. Rajashekara, and A. Chandra, “Analysis and control of frequency stability in low-inertia power systems: A review,” 

IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica , vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 2363–2383, 2024. [3] E. M. Abadi and M. H. Nazari, “Distributed anomaly detection in modern power systems: A penalty-based mitigation approach,” in 2024 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–5. [4] M. Wadi, A. Shobole, W. Elmasry, and I. Kucuk, “Load frequency control in smart grids: A review of recent developments,” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews , vol. 189, p. 114013, 2024. [5] D. D. Rasolomampionona, M. Połecki, K. Zagrajek, W. Wróblewski, and M. Januszewski, “A comprehensive review of load frequency control technologies,” Energies , vol. 17, no. 12, p. 2915, 2024. [6] A. M. Ersdal, L. Imsland, and K. Uhlen, “Model predictive load-frequency control,” IEEE Transactions on power systems , vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 777–785, 2015. [7] P. Ojaghi and M. Rahmani, “Lmi-based robust predictive load frequency control for power systems with communication delays,” IEEE Transac-tions on Power Systems , vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 4091–4100, 2017. [8] Z. Hu, R. Su, K.-V. Ling, Y. Guo, and R. Ma, “Resilient event-triggered mpc for load frequency regulation with wind turbines under false data injection attacks,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering , vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 7073–7083, 2023. [9] D. Yang, B. Wang, G. Cai, J. Ma, J. Tian, Z. Chen, and L. Wang, “Inertia-adaptive model predictive control-based load frequency control for interconnected power systems with wind power,” IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution , vol. 14, no. 22, pp. 5029–5036, 2020. [10] W. Wang, Y. Sasaki, N. Yorino, Y. Zoka, and A. Bedawy, “Frequency regulation of high-penetration renewable energy microgrids using adap-tive model predictive control,” CSEE Journal of Power and Energy Systems , 2024. [11] H. Nagaosa, Y. Sasaki, H. Yang, Y. Zoka, N. Yorino, A. Bedawy, and W. Wang, “An adaptive model predictive load frequency control strategy for low-inertia power systems,” in 2025 7th International Conference on Smart Power & Internet Energy Systems (SPIES) . IEEE, 2025, pp. 318–323. [12] M. Ayman, M. A. Attia, and A. M. Asim, “An adaptive model predictive control approach for robust load frequency control under renewable energy disturbances,” Scientific Reports , 2026. [13] S. Yuan, L. Y. Wang, G. Yin, and M. H. Nazari, “Contingency detec-tion in modern power systems: A stochastic hybrid system method,” 

Sustainable Energy, Grids and Networks , vol. 39, p. 101414, 2024. [14] E. M. Abadi, H. Varmazyari, and M. H. Nazari, “Detecting unobservable contingencies in active distribution systems using a stochastic hybrid systems approach,” in 2025 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting (PESGM) , 2025, pp. 1–5. [15] L. Y. Wang, G. Yin, F. Lin, M. P. Polis, and W. Chen, “Joint estimation of continuous and discrete states in randomly switched linear systems with unobservable subsystems,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control ,vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 6007–6019, 2023. [16] A. Sharma and N. Singh, “Load frequency control of connected multi-area multi-source power systems using energy storage and lyrebird optimization algorithm tuned pid controller,” Journal of Energy Storage ,vol. 100, p. 113609, 2024.